2875 


ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC MOVEMENT 

(1914) 



2876 


Intentionally left blank 



2877 


ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC MOVEMENT 

Fluctuat nec mergitur 1 
(On the coat of arms of the City of Paris) 

I 

No one need be surprised at the subjective character of the contribution I propose to make here to the 
history of the psycho-analytic movement, nor need anyone wonder at the part I play in it. For psycho- 
analysis is my creation; for ten years I was the only person who concerned himself with it, and all the 
dissatisfaction which the new phenomenon aroused in my contemporaries has been poured out in the form 
of criticisms on my head. Although it is a long time now since I was the only psycho-analyst, I consider 
myself justified in maintaining that even to-day no one can know better than I do what psycho-analysis is, 
how it differs from other ways of investigating the life of the mind, and precisely what should be called 
psycho-analysis and what would better be described by some other name. In thus repudiating what seems 
to me a cool act of usurpation, I am indirectly informing the readers of this Jahrbuch the events that have 
led to the changes in its editorship and format. 

1 [ 'It is tossed by the waves, but does not sink'.] 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2878 


In 1909, in the lecture-room of an American university, I had my first opportunity of speaking in public 
about psycho-analysis. 1 The occasion was a momentous one for my work, and moved by this thought I then 
declared that it was not I who had brought psycho-analysis into existence: the credit for this was due to 
someone else, to Josef Breuer, whose work had been done at a time when I was still a student engaged in 
passing my examinations (1880-2). Since I gave those lectures, however, some well-disposed friends have 
suggested to me a doubt whether my gratitude was not expressed too extravagantly on that occasion. In 
their view I ought to have done as I had previously been accustomed to do: treated Breuer’s ‘cathartic 
procedure’ as a preliminary stage of psycho-analysis, and represented psycho-analysis itself as beginning 
with my discarding the hypnotic technique and introducing free associations. It is of no great importance in 
any case whether the history of psycho-analysis is reckoned as beginning with the cathartic method or with 
my modification of it; I refer to this uninteresting point merely because certain opponents of psycho-analysis 
have a habit of occasionally recollecting that after all the art of psycho-analysis was not invented by me, but 
by Breuer. This only happens, of course, if their views allow them to find something in it deserving attention; 
if they set no such limits to their rejection of it, psycho-analysis is always without question my work alone. I 
have never heard that Breuer’s great share in psycho-analysis has earned him a proportionate measure of 
criticism and abuse. As I have long recognized that to stir up contradiction and arouse bitterness is the 
inevitable fate of psycho-analysis, I have come to the conclusion that I must be the true originator of all that 
is particularly characteristic in it. I am happy to be able to add that none of the efforts to minimize my part in 
creating this much-abused analysis have ever come from Breuer himself or could claim any support from 
him. 

Breuer’s discoveries have so often been described that I can dispense with discussing them in detail 
here. These were the fundamental fact that the symptoms of hysterical patients are founded upon scenes in 
their past lives which have made a great impression on them but have been forgotten (traumas); the 
therapy founded upon this, which consisted in causing them to remember and reproduce these experiences 
in a state of hypnosis (catharsis); and the fragment of theory inferred from it, which was that these 
symptoms represented an abnormal employment of amounts of excitation which had not been disposed of 
(conversion). Whenever Breuer, in his theoretical contribution to the Studies on Hysteria (1895), referred to 
this process of conversion, he always added my name in brackets after it, as though the priority for this first 
attempt at theoretical evaluation belonged to me. I believe that actually this distinction relates only to the 
name, and that the conception came to us simultaneously and together. 


1 In my ‘Five Lectures’ (1910a), delivered at Clark University. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2879 


It is well known, too, that after Breuer made his first discovery of the cathartic method he let it rest for a 
number of years, and only took it up again at my instigation, on my return from my studies under Charcot. 
He had a large consulting practice in medicine which made great claims on him; I myself had only 
unwillingly taken up the profession of medicine, but I had at that time a strong motive for helping people 
suffering from nervous affections or at least for wishing to understand something about their states. I had 
embarked upon physical therapy, and had felt absolutely helpless after the disappointing results from my 
study of Erb’s Elektrotherapie, which put forward such a number of indications and recommendations. If I 
did not at the time arrive on my own account at the conclusion which Mobius established later, that the 
successes of electrical treatment in nervous patients are the effects of suggestion, there is no doubt that 
only the total absence of these promised successes was to blame. Treatment by suggestion during deep 
hypnosis, which I learned from Liebeault’s and Bernheim’s highly impressive demonstrations, then seemed 
to offer a satisfactory substitute for the failure of electrical treatment. But the practice of investigating 
patients in a state of hypnosis, with which Breuer made me acquainted - a practice which combined an 
automatic mode of operation with the satisfaction of scientific curiosity - was bound to be incomparably 
more attractive than the monotonous, forcible prohibitions used in treatment by suggestion, prohibitions 
which stood in the way of all research. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2880 

We have recently received a piece of advice, purporting to represent one of the latest developments of 
psycho-analysis, to the effect that the current conflict and the exciting cause of illness are to be brought into 
the foreground in analysis. Now this is exactly what Breuer and I used to do at the beginning of our work 
with the cathartic method. We led the patient’s attention directly to the traumatic scene in which the 
symptom had arisen, and we endeavoured to discover the mental conflict in that scene and to release the 
suppressed affect in it. In the course of this we discovered the mental process, characteristic of the 
neuroses, which I later named ‘regression’. The patient’s associations moved back from the scene which 
we were trying to elucidate to earlier experiences, and compelled the analysis, which was supposed to 
correct the present, to occupy itself with the past. This regression led constantly further backwards; at first it 
seemed regularly to bring us to puberty; later on, failures and points which still eluded explanation drew the 
analytic work still further back into years of childhood which had hitherto been inaccessible to any kind of 
exploration. This regressive direction became an important characteristic of analysis. It appeared that 
psycho-analysis could explain nothing belonging to the present without referring back to something past; 
indeed, that every pathogenic experience implied a previous experience which, though not in itself 
pathogenic, had yet endowed the later one with its pathogenic quality. The temptation to confine one’s 
attention to the known present exciting cause was so strong, however, that even in later analyses I gave 
way to it. In the analysis of the patient I named ‘Dora’, carried out in 1899, I had knowledge of the scene 
which occasioned the outbreak of the current illness. I tried innumerable times to submit this experience to 
analysis, but even direct demands always failed to produce from her anything more than the same meagre 
and incomplete description of it. Not until a long detour, leading back over her earliest childhood, had been 
made, did a dream present itself which on analysis brought to her mind the hitherto forgotten details of this 
scene, so that a comprehension and a solution of the current conflict became possible. 

This one example shows how very misleading is the advice referred to above, and what a degree of 
scientific regression is represented by the neglect of regression in analytic technique which is thus 
recommended to us. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2881 

The first difference between Breuer and myself came to light on a question concerning the finer psychical 
mechanism of hysteria. He gave preference to a theory which was still to some extent physiological, as one 
might say; he tried to explain the mental splitting in hysterical patients by the absence of communication 
between various mental states (‘states of consciousness’, as we called them at that time), and he therefore 
constructed the theory of ‘hypnoid states’, the products of which were supposed to penetrate into ‘waking 
consciousness’ like unassimilated foreign bodies. I had taken the matter less scientifically; everywhere I 
seemed to discern motives and tendencies analogous to those of everyday life, and I looked upon psychical 
splitting itself as an effect of a process of repelling which at that time I called ‘defence’, and later, 
‘repression’. I made a short-lived attempt to allow the two mechanisms a separate existence side by side, 
but as observation showed me always and only one thing, it was not long before my ‘defence’ theory took 
up its stand opposite his ‘hypnoid’ one. 

I am quite sure, however, that this opposition between our views had nothing to do with the breach in our 
relations which followed shortly after. This had deeper causes, but it came about in such a way that at first I 
did not understand it; it was only later that I learnt from many clear indications how to interpret it. It will be 
remembered that Breuer said of his famous first patient that the element of sexuality was astonishingly 
undeveloped in her and had contributed nothing to the very rich clinical picture of the case. I have always 
wondered why the critics did not more often cite this assertion of Breuer’s as an argument against my 
contention of a sexual aetiology in the neuroses, and even to-day I do not know whether I ought to regard 
the omission as evidence of tact or of carelessness on their part. Anyone who reads the history of Breuer’s 
case now in the light of the knowledge gained in the last twenty years will at once perceive the symbolism 
in it - the snakes, the stiffening, the paralysis of the arm - and, on taking into account the situation at the 
bedside of the young woman’s sick father, will easily guess the real interpretation of her symptoms; his 
opinion of the part played by sexuality in her mental life will therefore be very different from that of her 
doctor. In his treatment of her case, Breuer was able to make use of a very intense suggestive rapport with 
the patient, which may serve us as a complete prototype of what we call ‘transference’ to-day. Now I have 
strong reasons for suspecting that after all her symptoms had been relieved Breuer must have discovered 
from further indications the sexual motivation of this transference, but that the universal nature of this 
unexpected phenomenon escaped him, with the result that, as though confronted by an ‘untoward event ’, 1 
he broke off all further investigation. He never said this to me in so many words, but he told me enough at 
different times to justify this reconstruction of what happened. When I later began more and more resolutely 
to put forward the significance of sexuality in the aetiology of neuroses, he was the first to show the reaction 
of distaste and repudiation which was later to become so familiar to me, but which at that time I had not yet 
learnt to recognize as my inevitable fate. 

The fact of the emergence of the transference in its crudely sexual form, whether affectionate or hostile, 
in every treatment of a neurosis, although this is neither desired nor induced by either doctor or patient, has 
always seemed to me the most irrefragable proof that the source of the driving forces of neurosis lies in 
sexual life. This argument has never received anything approaching the degree of attention that it merits, 
for if it had, investigations in this field would leave no other conclusion open. As far as I am concerned, this 
argument has remained the decisive one, over and above the more specific findings of analytic work. 


1 [In English in the original.] 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2882 


There was some consolation for the bad reception accorded to my contention of a sexual aetiology in the 
neuroses even by my more intimate circle of friends - for a vacuum rapidly formed itself about my person - 
in the thought that I was taking up the fight for a new and original idea. But, one day, certain memories 
gathered in my mind which disturbed this pleasing notion, but which gave me in exchange a valuable 
insight into the processes of human creative activity and the nature of human knowledge. The idea for 
which I was being made responsible had by no means originated with me. It had been imparted to me by 
three people whose opinion had commanded my deepest respect - by Breuer himself, by Charcot, and by 
Chrobak, the gynaecologist at the University, perhaps the most eminent of all our Vienna physicians. These 
three men had all communicated to me a piece of knowledge which, strictly speaking, they themselves did 
not possess. Two of them later denied having done so when I reminded them of the fact; the third (the great 
Charcot) would probably have done the same if it had been granted me to see him again. But these three 
identical opinions, which I had heard without understanding, had lain dormant in my mind for years, until 
one day they awoke in the form of an apparently original discovery. 

One day, when I was a young house-physician, I was walking across the town with Breuer, when a man 
came up who evidently wanted to speak to him urgently. I fell behind. As soon as Breuer was free, he told 
me in his friendly, instructive way that this man was the husband of a patient of his and had brought him 
some news of her. The wife, he added, was behaving in such a peculiar way in society that she had been 
brought to him for treatment as a nervous case. He concluded: These things are always secrets d’alcoveV I 
asked him in astonishment what he meant, and he answered by explaining the word alcove (‘marriage- 
bed’) to me, for he failed to realize how extraordinary the matter of his statement seemed to me. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2883 


Some years later, at one of Charcot’s evening receptions, I happened to be standing near the great 
teacher at a moment when he appeared to be telling Brouardel a very interesting story about something 
that had happened during his day’s work. I hardly heard the beginning, but gradually my attention was 
seized by what he was talking of: a young married couple from a distant country in the East - the woman a 
severe sufferer, the man either impotent or exceedingly awkward. ‘Tachez done ,’ I heard Charcot repeating, 
‘ye vous assure, vous y arriverez.' 1 Brouardel, who spoke less loudly, must have expressed his 
astonishment that symptoms like the wife’s could have been produced by such circumstances. For Charcot 
suddenly broke out with great animation: ‘Mais, dans des cas pareils e’est toujours la chose genitale, 
toujours . . . toujours . . . toujours ’; 2 and he crossed his arms over his stomach, hugging himself and 
jumping up and down on his toes several times in his own characteristically lively way. I know that for a 
moment I was almost paralysed with amazement and said to myself: ‘Well, but if he knows that, why does 
he never say so?’ But the impression was soon forgotten; brain anatomy and the experimental induction of 
hysterical paralyses absorbed all my interest. 

A year later, I had begun my medical career in Vienna as a lecturer in nervous diseases, and in 
everything relating to the aetiology of the neuroses I was still as ignorant and innocent as one could expect 
of a promising student trained at a university. One day I had a friendly message from Chrobak, asking me 
to take a woman patient of his to whom he could not give enough time, owing to his new appointment as a 
University teacher. I arrived at the patient’s house before he did and found that she was suffering from 
attacks of meaningless anxiety, and could only be soothed by the most precise information about where her 
doctor was at every moment of the day. When Chrobak arrived he took me aside and told me that the 
patient’s anxiety was due to the fact that although she had been married for eighteen years she was still 
virgo intacta. The husband was absolutely impotent. In such cases, he said, there was nothing for a 
medical man to do but to shield this domestic misfortune with his own reputation, and put up with it if people 
shrugged their shoulders and said of him: ‘He’s no good if he can’t cure her after so many years.’ The sole 
prescription for such a malady, he added, is familiar enough to us, but we cannot order it. It runs: 

‘Rx Penis normalis 

dosim 

repetaturl’ 

I had never heard of such a prescription, and felt inclined to shake my head over my kind friend’s cynicism. 

1 ['Go on trying! I promise you, you’ll succeed.’] 

2 ['But in this sort of case it’s always a question of the genitals - always, always, always.’] 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2884 

I have not of course disclosed the illustrious parentage of this scandalous idea in order to saddle other 
people with the responsibility for it. I am well aware that it is one thing to give utterance to an idea once or 
twice in the form of a passing apergu, and quite another to mean it seriously - to take it literally and pursue 
it in the face of every contradictory detail, and to win it a place among accepted truths. It is the difference 
between a casual flirtation and a legal marriage with all its duties and difficulties. ‘Epouser les idees de . . ,’ 1 
is no uncommon figure of speech, at any rate in French. 

Among the other new factors which were added to the cathartic procedure as a result of my work and 
which transformed it into psycho-analysis, I may mention in particular the theory of repression and 
resistance, the recognition of infantile sexuality, and the interpreting and exploiting of dreams as a source of 
knowledge of the unconscious. 

The theory of repression quite certainly came to me independently of any other source; I know of no 
outside impression which might have suggested it to me, and for a long time I imagined it to be entirely 
original, until Otto Rank (1911a) showed us a passage in Schopenhauer’s World as Will and Idea in which 
the philosopher seeks to give an explanation of insanity. What he says there about the struggle against 
accepting a distressing piece of reality coincides with my concept of repression so completely that once 
again I owe the chance of making a discovery to my not being well-read. Yet others have read the passage 
and passed it by without making this discovery, and perhaps the same would have happened to me if in my 
young days I had had more taste for reading philosophical works. In later years I have denied myself the 
very great pleasure of reading the works of Nietzsche, with the deliberate object of not being hampered in 
working out the impressions received in psycho-analysis by any sort of anticipatory ideas. I had therefore to 
be prepared - and I am so, gladly - to forgo all claims to priority in the many instances in which laborious 
psycho-analytic investigation can merely confirm the truths which the philosopher recognized by intuition. 


1 [To espouse an idea.’] 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2885 

The theory of repression is the corner-stone on which the whole structure of psycho-analysis rests. It is 
the most essential part of it; and yet it is nothing but a theoretical formulation of a phenomenon which may 
be observed as often as one pleases if one undertakes an analysis of a neurotic without resorting to 
hypnosis. In such cases one comes across a resistance which opposes the work of analysis and in order to 
frustrate it pleads a failure of memory. The use of hypnosis was bound to hide this resistance; the history of 
psycho-analysis proper, therefore, only begins with the new technique that dispenses with hypnosis. The 
theoretical consideration of the fact that this resistance coincides with an amnesia leads inevitably to the 
view of unconscious mental activity which is peculiar to psycho-analysis and which, too, distinguishes it 
quite clearly from philosophical speculations about the unconscious. It may thus be said that the theory of 
psycho-analysis is an attempt to account for two striking and unexpected facts of observation which emerge 
whenever an attempt is made to trace the symptoms of a neurotic back to their sources in his past life: the 
facts of transference and of resistance. Any line of investigation which recognizes these two facts and takes 
them as the starting-point of its work has a right to call itself psycho-analysis, even though it arrives at 
results other than my own. But anyone who takes up other sides of the problem while avoiding these two 
hypotheses will hardly escape a charge of misappropriation of property by attempted impersonation, if he 
persists in calling himself a psycho-analyst. 

If anyone sought to place the theory of repression and resistance among the premisses instead of the 
findings of psycho-analysis, I should oppose him most emphatically. Such premisses of a general 
psychological and biological nature do exist, and it would be useful to consider them on some other 
occasion; but the theory of repression is a product of psycho-analytic work, a theoretical inference 
legitimately drawn from innumerable observations. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2886 


Another product of this sort was the hypothesis of infantile sexuality. This, however, was made at a much 
later date. In the early days of tentative investigation by analysis no such thing was thought of. At first it was 
merely observed that the effects of present-day experiences had to be traced back to something in the 
past. But enquirers often find more than they bargain for. One was drawn further and further back into the 
past; one hoped at last to be able to stop at puberty, the period in which the sexual impulses are 
traditionally supposed to awake. But in vain; the tracks led still further back into childhood and into its earlier 
years. On the way, a mistaken idea had to be overcome which might have been almost fatal to the young 
science. Influenced by Charcot’s view of the traumatic origin of hysteria, one was readily inclined to accept 
as true and aetiologically significant the statements made by patients in which they ascribed their 
symptoms to passive sexual experiences in the first years of childhood - to put it bluntly, to seduction. 

When this aetiology broke down under the weight of its own improbability and contradiction in definitely 
ascertainable circumstances, the result at first was helpless bewilderment. Analysis had led back to these 
infantile sexual traumas by the right path, and yet they were not true. The firm ground of reality was gone. 

At that time I would gladly have given up the whole work, just as my esteemed predecessor, Breuer, had 
done when he made his unwelcome discovery. Perhaps I persevered only because I no longer had any 
choice and could not then begin again at anything else. At last came the reflection that, after all, one had no 
right to despair because one has been deceived in one’s expectations; one must revise those expectations. 
If hysterical subjects trace back their symptoms to traumas that are fictitious, then the new fact which 
emerges is precisely that they create such scenes in phantasy, and this psychical reality requires to be 
taken into account alongside practical reality. This reflection was soon followed by the discovery that these 
phantasies were intended to cover up the auto-erotic activity of the first years of childhood, to embellish it 
and raise it to a higher plane. And now, from behind the phantasies, the whole range of a child’s sexual life 
came to light. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2887 

With this sexual activity of the first years of childhood the inherited constitution of the individual also came 
into its own. Disposition and experience are here linked up in an indissoluble aetiological unity. For 
disposition exaggerates impressions which would otherwise have been completely commonplace and have 
had no effect, so that they become traumas giving rise to stimulations and fixations; while experiences 
awaken factors in the disposition which, without them, might have long remained dormant and perhaps 
never have developed. The last word on the subject of traumatic aetiology was spoken later by Abraham, 
when he pointed out that the sexual constitution which is peculiar to children is precisely calculated to 
provoke sexual experiences of a particular kind - namely traumas. 

In the beginning, my statements about infantile sexuality were founded almost exclusively on the findings 
of analysis in adults which led back into the past. I had no opportunity of direct observations on children. It 
was therefore a very great triumph when it became possible years later to confirm almost all my inferences 
by direct observation and the analysis of very young children - a triumph that lost some of its magnitude as 
one gradually realized that the nature of the discovery was such that one should really be ashamed of 
having had to make it. The further one carried these observations on children, the more self-evident the 
facts became; but the more astonishing, too, did it become that one had taken so much trouble to overlook 
them. 

Such a certain conviction of the existence and importance of infantile sexuality can, however, only be 
obtained by the method of analysis, by pursuing the symptoms and peculiarities of neurotics back to their 
ultimate sources, the discovery of which then explains whatever is explicable in them and enables whatever 
is modifiable to be changed. I can understand that one would arrive at different results if, as C. G. Jung has 
recently done, one first forms a theoretical conception of the nature of the sexual instinct and then seeks to 
explain the life of children on that basis. A conception of this kind is bound to be selected arbitrarily or in 
accordance with irrelevant considerations, and runs the risk of proving inadequate for the field to which one 
is seeking to apply it. It is true that the analytic method, too, leads to certain ultimate difficulties and 
obscurities in regard to sexuality and its relation to the total life of the individual. But these problems cannot 
be got rid of by speculation; they must await solution through other observations or through observations in 
other fields. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2888 


I need say little about the interpretation of dreams. It came as the first fruits of the technical innovation I 
had adopted when, following a dim presentiment, I decided to replace hypnosis by free association. My 
desire for knowledge had not at the start been directed towards understanding dreams. I do not know of 
any outside influence which drew my interest to them or inspired me with any helpful expectations. Before 
Breuer and I ceased to meet I only just had time to tell him in a single sentence that I now understood how 
to translate dreams. Since this was how the discovery came about, it followed that the symbolism in the 
language of dreams was almost the last thing to become accessible to me, for the dreamer’s associations 
help very little towards understanding symbols. I have held fast to the habit of always studying things 
themselves before looking for information about them in books, and therefore I was able to establish the 
symbolism of dreams for myself before I was led to it by Schemer’s work on the subject. It was only later 
that I came to appreciate to its full extent this mode of expression of dreams. This was partly through the 
influence of the works of Stekel, who at first did such very creditable work but afterwards went totally astray. 
The close connection between psycho-analytic dream-interpretation and the art of interpreting dreams as 
practised and held in such high esteem in antiquity only became clear to me much later. Later on I found 
the essential characteristic and most important part of my dream theory - the derivation of dream-distortion 
from an internal conflict, a kind of inner dishonesty - in a writer who was ignorant, it is true, of medicine, 
though not of philosophy, the famous engineer J. Popper, who published his Phantasien elnes Realisten 
under the name of Lynkeus. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2889 


The interpretation of dreams became a solace and a support to me in those arduous first years of 
analysis, when I had to master the technique, clinical phenomena and therapy of the neuroses all at the 
same time. At that period I was completely isolated and in the network of problems and accumulation of 
difficulties I often dreaded losing my bearings and also my confidence. There were often patients with 
whom an unaccountably long time elapsed before my hypothesis, that a neurosis was bound to become 
intelligible through analysis, proved true; but these patients’ dreams, which might be regarded as analogues 
of their symptoms, almost always confirmed the hypothesis. 

It was only my success in this direction that enabled me to persevere. The result is that I have acquired a 
habit of gauging the measure of a psychologist’s understanding by his attitude to dream-interpretation; and 
I have observed with satisfaction that most of the opponents of psycho-analysis avoid this field altogether or 
else display remarkable clumsiness if they attempt to deal with it. Moreover, I soon saw the necessity of 
carrying out a self-analysis, and this I did with the help of a series of my own dreams which led me back 
through all the events of my childhood; and I am still of the opinion to-day that this kind of analysis may 
suffice for anyone who is a good dreamer and not too abnormal. 

I think that by thus unrolling the story of the development of psycho-analysis I have shown what it is, 
better than by a systematic description of it. I did not at first perceive the peculiar nature of what I had 
discovered. I unhesitatingly sacrificed my growing popularity as a doctor, and the increase in attendance 
during my consulting hours, by making a systematic enquiry into the sexual factors involved in the 
causation of my patients’ neuroses; and this brought me a great many new facts which finally confirmed my 
conviction of the practical importance of the sexual factor. I innocently addressed a meeting of the Vienna 
Society for Psychiatry and Neurology with Krafft-Ebing in the chair, expecting that the material losses I had 
willingly undergone would be made up for by the interest and recognition of my colleagues. I treated my 
discoveries as ordinary contributions to science and hoped they would be received in the same spirit. But 
the silence which my communications met with, the void which formed itself about me, the hints that were 
conveyed to me, gradually made me realize that assertions on the part played by sexuality in the aetiology 
of the neuroses cannot count upon meeting with the same kind of treatment as other communications. I 
understood that from now onwards I was one of those who have ‘disturbed the sleep of the world’, as 
Hebbel says, and that I could not reckon upon objectivity and tolerance. Since, however, my conviction of 
the general accuracy of my observations and conclusions grew even stronger, and since neither my 
confidence in my own judgement nor my moral courage were precisely small, the outcome of the situation 
could not be in doubt. I made up my mind to believe that it had been my fortune to discover some 
particularly important facts and connections, and I was prepared to accept the fate that sometimes 
accompanies such discoveries. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2890 


I pictured the future as follows: - 1 should probably succeed in maintaining myself by means of the 
therapeutic success of the new procedure, but science would ignore me entirely during my lifetime; some 
decades later, someone else would infallibly come upon the same things - for which the time was not now 
ripe - would achieve recognition for them and bring me honour as a forerunner whose failure had been 
inevitable. Meanwhile, like Robinson Crusoe, I settled down as comfortably as possible on my desert 
island. When I look back to those lonely years, away from the pressures and confusions of to-day, it seems 
like a glorious heroic age. My ‘splendid isolation’ 1 was not without its advantages and charms. I did not 
have to read any publications, nor listen to any ill-informed opponents; I was not subject to influence from 
any quarter; there was nothing to hustle me. I learnt to restrain speculative tendencies and to follow the 
unforgotten advice of my master, Charcot: to look at the same things again and again until they themselves 
begin to speak. My publications, which I was able to place with a little trouble, could always lag far behind 
my knowledge, and could be postponed as long as I pleased, since there was no doubtful ‘priority’ to be 
defended. The Interpretation of Dreams, for instance, was finished in all essentials at the beginning of 1896 
but was not written out until the summer of 1899. The analysis of ‘Dora’ was over at the end of 1899; the 
case history was written in the next two weeks, but was not published until 1905. Meanwhile my writings 
were not reviewed in the medical journals, or, if as an exception they were reviewed, they were dismissed 
with expressions of scornful or pitying superiority. Occasionally a colleague would make some reference to 
me in one of his publications; it would be very short and not at all flattering - words such as ‘eccentric’, 
‘extreme’, or ‘very peculiar’ would be used. It once happened that an assistant at the clinic in Vienna where 
I gave my University lectures asked me for permission to attend the course. He listened very attentively and 
said nothing; after the last lecture was over he offered to join me outside. As we walked away, he told me 
that with his chief’s knowledge he had written a book combating my views; he regretted very much, 
however, that he had not first learnt more about them from my lectures, for in that case he would have 
written much of it differently. He had indeed enquired at the clinic whether he had not better first read The 
Interpretation of Dreams, but had been advised against doing so - it was not worth the trouble. He then 
himself compared the structure of my theory, so far as he now understood it, with that of the Catholic 
Church as regards its internal solidity. In the interests of the salvation of his soul, I shall assume that this 
remark implied a certain amount of appreciation. But he concluded by saying that it was too late to alter 
anything in his book, since it was already in print. Nor did my colleague think it necessary later to make any 
public avowal of his change of views on the subject of psycho-analysis; but preferred, in his capacity as a 
regular reviewer for a medical journal, to follow its development with flippant comments. 


1 [In English in the original.] 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2891 


Whatever personal sensitiveness I possessed became blunted during those years, to my advantage. I 
was saved from becoming embittered, however, by a circumstance which is not always present to help 
lonely discoverers. Such people are as a rule tormented by the need to account for the lack of sympathy or 
the aversion of their contemporaries, and feel this attitude as a distressing contradiction of the security of 
their own sense of conviction. There was no need for me to feel so; for psycho-analytic theory enabled me 
to understand this attitude in my contemporaries and to see it as a necessary consequence of fundamental 
analytic premisses. If it was true that the set of facts I had discovered were kept from the knowledge of 
patients themselves by internal resistances of an affective kind, then these resistances would be bound to 
appear in healthy people too, as soon as some external source confronted them with what was repressed. 
It was not surprising that they should be able to justify this rejection of my ideas on intellectual grounds 
though it was actually affective in origin. The same thing happened equally often with patients; the 
arguments they advanced were the same and were not precisely brilliant. In Falstaff’s words, reasons are 
‘as plenty as blackberries’. The only difference was that with patients one was in a position to bring 
pressure to bear on them so as to induce them to get insight into their resistances and overcome them, 
whereas one had to do without this advantage in dealing with people who were ostensibly healthy. How to 
compel these healthy people to examine the matter in a cool and scientifically objective spirit was an 
unsolved problem which was best left to time to clear up. In the history of science one can clearly see that 
often the very proposition which has at first called out nothing but contradiction has later come to be 
accepted, although no new proofs in support of it have been brought forward. 

It was hardly to be expected, however, that during the years when I alone represented psycho-analysis I 
should develop any particular respect for the world’s opinion or any bias towards intellectual appeasement. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2892 


From the year 1902 onwards, a number of young doctors gathered round me with the express intention of 
learning, practising and spreading the knowledge of psycho-analysis. The stimulus came from a colleague 
who had himself experienced the beneficial effects of analytic therapy. Regular meetings took place on 
certain evenings at my house, discussions were held according to certain rules and the participants 
endeavoured to find their bearings in this new and strange field of research and to interest others in it. One 
day a young man who had passed through a technical training college introduced himself with a manuscript 
which showed very unusual comprehension. We persuaded him to go through the Gymnasium [Secondary 
School] and the University and to devote himself to the non-medical side of psycho-analysis. The little 
society acquired in him a zealous and dependable secretary and I gained in Otto Rank a most loyal helper 
and co-worker. 1 

The small circle soon expanded, and in the course of the next few years often changed its composition. 
On the whole I could tell myself that it was hardly inferior, in wealth and variety of talent, to the staff of any 
clinical teacher one could think of. It included from the beginning the men who were later to play such a 
considerable, if not always a welcome, part in the history of the psycho-analytic movement. At that time, 
however, one could not yet guess at these developments. I had every reason to be satisfied, and I think I 
did everything possible to impart my own knowledge and experience to the others. There were only two 
inauspicious circumstances which at last estranged me inwardly from the group. I could not succeed in 
establishing among its members the friendly relations that ought to obtain between men who are all 
engaged upon the same difficult work; nor was I able to stifle the disputes about priority for which there 
were so many opportunities under these conditions of work in common. The difficulties in the way of giving 
instruction in the practice of psycho-analysis, which are quite particularly great and are responsible for 
much in the present dissensions, were evident already in this private Vienna Psycho-Analytical Society. I 
myself did not venture to put forward a still unfinished technique and a theory still in the making with an 
authority which would probably have enabled the others to avoid some wrong turnings and ultimate 
disasters. The self-reliance of intellectual workers, their early independence of their teacher, is always 
gratifying from a psychological point of view; but it is only of advantage to science if those workers fulfil 
certain personal conditions which are none too common. For psycho-analysis in particular a long and 
severe discipline and training in self-discipline would have been required. In view of the courage displayed 
by their devotion to a subject so much frowned upon and so poor in prospects, I was disposed to tolerate 
much among the members to which I should otherwise have made objection. Besides doctors, the circle 
included others - men of education who had recognized something important in psycho-analysis: writers, 
painters and so on. My Interpretation of Dreams and my book on jokes, among others, had shown from the 
beginning that the theories of psycho-analysis cannot be restricted to the medical field, but are capable of 
application to a variety of other mental sciences. 

1 [Footnote added 1924:] Now director of the Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag [International Psycho- 
Analytical Publishing House] and editor of the Zeitschrift and Imago from their inception. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2893 


In 1907 the situation changed all at once and contrary to all expectations. It appeared that psycho- 
analysis had unobtrusively awakened interest and gained friends, and that there were even some scientific 
workers who were ready to acknowledge it. A communication from Bleuler had informed me before this that 
my works had been studied and made use of in the Burgholzli. In January 1907, the first member of the 
Zurich clinic came to Vienna - Dr. Eitingon. 1 Other visits followed, which led to an animated exchange of 
ideas. Finally, on the invitation of C. G. Jung, at that time still assistant physician at the Burgholzli, a first 
meeting took place at Salzburg in the spring of 1908, which brought together friends of psycho-analysis 
from Vienna, Zurich and other places. One of the results of this first Psycho-Analytical Congress was the 
founding of a periodical called the Jahrbuch fur psychoanalytische und psychopathologische Forschungen, 
under the direction of Bleuler and Freud and edited by Jung, which first appeared in 1909. This publication 
gave expression to an intimate co-operation between Vienna and Zurich. 

I have repeatedly acknowledged with gratitude the great services rendered by the Zurich School of 
Psychiatry in the spread of psycho-analysis, particularly by Bleuler and Jung, and I have no hesitation in 
doing so again, even in the greatly altered circumstances of the present. True, it was not the support of the 
Zurich School which first directed the attention of the scientific world to psycho-analysis at that time. What 
had happened was that the latency period had expired and everywhere psycho-analysis was becoming the 
object of ever-increasing interest. But in all other places this accession of interest at first produced nothing 
but a very emphatic repudiation, mostly a quite passionate one; whereas in Zurich, on the contrary, 
agreement on general lines was the dominant note. Moreover, nowhere else did such a compact little group 
of adherents exist, or could a public clinic be placed at the service of psycho-analytic researches, or was 
there a clinical teacher who included psycho-analytic theories as an integral part of his psychiatric course. 
The Zurich group thus became the nucleus of the small band who were fighting for the recognition of 
analysis. The only opportunity of learning the new art and working at it in practice lay there. Most of my 
followers and co-workers at the present time came to me by way of Zurich, even those who were 
geographically much nearer to Vienna than to Switzerland. In relation to Western Europe, which contains 
the great centres of our culture, the position of Vienna is an outlying one; and its prestige has for many 
years been affected by strong prejudices. Representatives of all the most important nations congregate in 
Switzerland, where intellectual activity is so lively; a focus of infection there was bound to be of great 
importance for the spread of the ‘psychical epidemic’, as Hoche of Freiburg has called it. 


1 [Footnote added 1924:] The subsequent founder of the ‘Psycho-Analytic Policlinic’ in Berlin. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2894 

According to the evidence of a colleague who witnessed developments at the Burgholzli, it appears that 
psycho-analysis awakened interest there very early. In Jung’s work on occult phenomena, published in 
1902, there was already an allusion to my book on dream-interpretation. From 1903 or 1904, says my 
informant, psycho-analysis was in the forefront of interest. After personal relations between Vienna and 
Zurich had been established, an informal society was also started, in the middle of 1907, in the Burgholzli, 
where the problems of psycho-analysis were discussed at regular meetings. In the alliance between the 
Vienna and Zurich schools the Swiss were by no means mere recipients. They had already produced very 
creditable scientific work, the results of which were of service to psycho-analysis. The association 
experiments started by the Wundt School had been interpreted by them in a psycho-analytic sense, and 
had proved applicable in unexpected ways. By this means it had become possible to arrive at rapid 
experimental confirmation of psycho-analytic observations and to demonstrate directly to students certain 
connections which an analyst would only have been able to tell them about. The first bridge linking up 
experimental psychology with psycho-analysis had been built. 

In psycho-analytic treatment, association experiments enable a provisional, qualitative analysis of the 
case to be made, but they furnish no essential contribution to the technique and can be dispensed with in 
carrying out analyses. More important, however, was another achievement by the Zurich school, or its 
leaders, Bleuler and Jung. The former showed that light could be thrown on a large number of purely 
psychiatric cases by adducing the same processes as have been recognized through psycho-analysis to 
obtain in dreams and neuroses (Freudian mechanisms); and Jung successfully applied the analytic method 
of interpretation to the most alien and obscure phenomena of dementia praecox, so that their sources in the 
life-history and interests of the patient came clearly to light. After this it was impossible for psychiatrists to 
ignore psycho-analysis any longer. Bleuler’s great work on schizophrenia (1911), in which the psycho- 
analytic point of view was placed on an equal footing with the clinical systematic one, completed this 
success. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2895 


I will not omit to point out a divergence which was already at that time noticeable in the direction taken by 
the work of the two schools. As early as in 1897 I had published the analysis of a case of schizophrenia, 
which however was of a paranoid character, so that the solution of it could not take away from the 
impression made by Jung’s analyses. But to me the important point had been, not so much the possibility of 
interpreting the symptoms, as the psychical mechanism of the disease, and above all the agreement of this 
mechanism with that of hysteria, which had already been discovered. At that time no light had yet been 
thrown on the differences between the two mechanisms. For I was then already aiming at a libido theory of 
the neuroses, which was to explain all neurotic and psychotic phenomena as proceeding from abnormal 
vicissitudes of the libido, that is, as diversions from its normal employment. This point of view was missed 
by the Swiss investigators. As far as I know, even to-day Bleuler maintains the view that the various forms 
of dementia praecox have an organic causation; and at the Salzburg Congress in 1908 Jung, whose book 
on this disease had appeared in 1907, supported the toxic theory of its causation, which takes no account 
of the libido theory, although it is true that it does not rule it out. Later on (1912) he came to grief on this 
same point, by making too much of the material which he had previously refused to employ. 

There is a third contribution made by the Swiss School, probably to be ascribed entirely to Jung, which I 
do not value so highly as others do whose concern with these matters is more remote. I refer to the theory 
of ‘complexes’ which grew out of the Diagnostische Assoziationsstudien [Studies in Word-Association] 
(1906). It has neither itself produced a psychological theory, not has it proved capable of easy incorporation 
into the context of psycho-analytic theory. The word ‘complex’, on the other hand, had become naturalized, 
so to speak, in psycho-analytic language; it is a convenient and often indispensable term for summing up a 
psychological state descriptively. None of the other terms coined by psycho-analysis for its own needs has 
achieved such widespread popularity or been so misapplied to the detriment of the construction of clearer 
concepts. Analysts began to speak among themselves of a ‘return of a complex' where they meant a ‘return 
of the repressed’, or fell into the habit of saying ‘I have a complex against him’, where the only correct 
expression would have been ‘a resistance against him’. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2896 


In the years following 1907, when the schools of Vienna and Zurich were united, psycho-analysis made 
the extraordinary surge forward of which the momentum is felt even to-day; this is shown both by the 
spread of psycho-analytic literature and by the constant increase in the number of doctors who are 
practising or studying it, as well as by the frequency of the attacks made on it at Congresses and in learned 
societies. It has penetrated into the most distant lands and has everywhere not merely startled psychiatrists 
but commanded the attention of the educated public and of scientific workers in other fields. Havelock Ellis, 
who has followed its development with sympathy though without ever calling himself an adherent, wrote in 
1911 in a report for the Australasian Medical Congress: ‘Freud’s psycho-analysis is now championed and 
carried out not only in Austria and in Switzerland, but in the United States, in England, in India, in Canada, 
and, I doubt not, in Australasia.’ 1 A physician from Chile (probably a German) spoke at the International 
Congress at Buenos Aires in 1910 in support of the existence of infantile sexuality and commended highly 
the effects of psycho-analytic therapy on obsessional symptoms. 2 An English neurologist in Central India 
(Berkeley-Hill) informed me, through a distinguished colleague who was visiting Europe, that the analyses 
of Mohammedan Indians which he had carried out showed that the aetiology of their neuroses was no 
different from what we find in our European patients. 

1 Havelock Ellis, 1911. 

2 G. Greve, 1910. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2897 


The introduction of psycho-analysis into North America was accompanied by very special marks of 
honour. In the autumn of 1909, Stanley Hall, the President of Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, 
invited Jung and myself to take part in the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the foundation of the 
University by giving a number of lectures in German. To our great surprise, we found the members of that 
small but highly esteemed University for the study of education and philosophy so unprejudiced that they 
were acquainted with all the literature of psycho-analysis and had given it a place in their lectures to 
students. In prudish America it was possible, in academic circles at least, to discuss freely and scientifically 
everything that in ordinary life is regarded as objectionable. The five lectures which I improvised in 
Worcester appeared in an English translation in the American Journal of Psychology, and were shortly 
afterwards published in German under the title Uber Psychoanalyse. Jung read a paper on diagnostic 
association experiments and another on conflicts in the mind of the child. We were rewarded with the 
honorary degree of Doctor of Laws. During that week of celebrations at Worcester, psycho-analysis was 
represented by five men: besides Jung and myself, there were Ferenczi, who had joined me for the journey, 
Ernest Jones, then at the University of Toronto (Canada) and now in London, and A. A. Brill, who was 
already practising psycho-analysis in New York. 

The most important personal relationship which arose from the meeting at Worcester was that with James 
J. Putnam, Professor of Neuropathology at Harvard University. Some years before, he had expressed an 
unfavourable opinion of psycho-analysis, but now he rapidly became reconciled to it and recommended it to 
his countrymen and his colleagues in a series of lectures which were as rich in content as they were brilliant 
in form. The esteem he enjoyed throughout America on account of his high moral character and unflinching 
love of truth was of great service to psycho-analysis and protected it against the denunciations which in all 
probability would otherwise quickly have overwhelmed it. Later on, yielding too much to the strong ethical 
and philosophical bent of his nature, Putnam made what seems to me an impossible demand - he expected 
psycho-analysis to place itself at the service of a particular moral-philosophical conception of the Universe - 
but he remains the chief pillar of the psycho-analytic movement in his native land. 1 

1 [Footnote added 1924:] See Putnam’s Addresses on Psycho-Analysis, 1921. Putnam died in 1918. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2898 

For the further spread of this movement Brill and Jones deserve the greatest credit: in their writings they 
drew their countrymen’s attention with unremitting assiduity to the easily observable fundamental facts of 
everyday life, of dreams and neurosis. Brill has contributed still further to this effect by his medical practice 
and by his translations of my works, and Jones by his instructive lectures and by his skill in debate at 
congresses in America. 1 The absence of any deep-rooted scientific tradition in America and the much less 
stringent rule of official authority there have been of decided advantage to the impetus given by Stanley 
Hall. It was characteristic of that country that from the beginning professors and superintendents of mental 
hospitals showed as much interest in analysis as independent practitioners. But it is clear that precisely for 
this reason the ancient centres of culture, where the greatest resistance has been displayed, must be the 
scene of the decisive struggle over psycho-analysis. 

Among European countries France has hitherto shown itself the least disposed to welcome psycho- 
analysis, although useful work in French by A. Maeder of Zurich has provided easy access to its theories. 
The first indications of sympathy came from the provinces: Morichau-Beauchant (Poitiers) was the first 
Frenchman to adhere publicly to psycho-analysis. Regis and Hesnard (Bordeaux) have recently attempted 
to disperse the prejudices of their countrymen against the new ideas by an exhaustive presentation, which, 
however, is not always understanding and takes special exception to symbolism. In Paris itself, a conviction 
still seems to reign (to which Janet himself gave eloquent expression at the Congress in London in 1913) 
that everything good in psycho-analysis is a repetition of Janet’s views with insignificant modifications, and 
that everything else in it is bad. At this Congress itself, indeed, Janet had to submit to a number of 
corrections by Ernest Jones, who was able to point out to him his insufficient knowledge of the subject. 

Even though we deny his claims, however, we cannot forget the value of his work on the psychology of the 
neuroses. 

1 The publications of both authors have appeared in collected volumes: Brill, 1912, and Ernest Jones, 1913. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2899 


In Italy, after several promising starts, no real interest was forthcoming. To Holland analysis found early 
access through personal connections: Van Emden, Van Ophuijsen, Van Renterghem ( Freud en zijn School) 
and the two Starckes are actively occupied with it both in practice and theory. 1 In scientific circles in 
England interest in analysis has developed very slowly, but there is reason to expect that the sense for the 
practical and the passionate love of justice in the English will ensure it a brilliant future there. 

In Sweden, P. Bjerre, who succeeded to Wetterstrand’s practice, gave up hypnotic suggestion, at least for 
the time, in favour of analytic treatment. R. Vogt (Christiania) had already shown an appreciation of psycho- 
analysis in his Psykiatrlens grundtraek, published in 1907; so that the first text-book of psychiatry to refer to 
psycho-analysis was written in Norwegian. In Russia, psycho-analysis has become generally known and 
has spread widely; almost all my writings, as well as those of other adherents of analysis, have been 
translated into Russian. But a really penetrating comprehension of analytic theories has not yet been 
evinced in Russia; so that the contributions of Russian physicians are at present not very notable. The only 
trained analyst there is M. Wulff who practises in Odessa. It is principally due to L. Jekels that psycho- 
analysis has been introduced to Polish scientific and literary circles. Hungary, so near geographically to 
Austria, and so far from it scientifically, has produced only one collaborator, S. Ferenczi, but one that 
indeed outweighs a whole society. 2 

1 The first official recognition of dream-interpretation and psycho-analysis in Europe was extended to them by the 
psychiatrist Jelgersma, Rector of the University of Leyden, in his rectorial address on February 9, 1914. 

2 ( Footnote added 1923:) It is not my intention, of course, to bring this account, written in 1914, ‘up to date' [in English 
in the original]. I will only add a few remarks to indicate how the picture has altered in the interval, which includes the 
World War. In Germany a gradual infiltration of analytic theories into clinical psychiatry is taking place, though this is not 
always admitted. The French translations of my works that have been appearing during the last few years have finally 
aroused a keen interest in psycho-analysis even in France, though for the moment this is more active in literary circles 
than in scientific ones. In Italy M. Levi Bianchini (of Nocera Superiore) and Edoardo Weiss (of Trieste) have come 
forward as translators and champions of psycho-analysis (cf. the Biblioteca Psicoanalitica Italiana). A collected edition 
of my works which is appearing in Madrid (translated by Lopez Ballesteros) is evidence of the lively interest taken in it 
in Spanish-speaking countries (Prof. H. Delgado in Lima). As regards England, the prophecy which I have made above 
seems to be in steady course of fulfilment; a special centre for the study of analysis has been formed at Calcutta in 
British India. In North America it is still true that the depth of understanding of analysis does not keep pace with its 
popularity. In Russia, since the Revolution, psycho-analytic work has begun afresh at several centres. In Poland the 
Polska Bibljoteka Psychoanalytyczna is now appearing. In Hungary a brilliant analytic school is flourishing under the 
leadership of Ferenczi. (Cf. the Festschrift issued in honour of his fiftieth birthday.) At the present time the Scandinavian 
countries are still the least receptive. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2900 


As regards the position of psycho-analysis in Germany, it can only be said that it forms the centre-point of 
scientific discussions and provokes the most emphatic expressions of disagreement both among doctors 
and laymen; these are not yet at an end, but are constantly flaring up again, sometimes with greater 
intensity. No official educational bodies there have up to now recognized psycho-analysis. Successful 
practitioners who employ it are few; only a few institutions, such as Binswanger’s in Kreuzlingen (on Swiss 
soil) and Marcinowski’s in Holstein, have opened their doors to it. One of the most prominent 
representatives of analysis, Karl Abraham, at one time an assistant of Bleuler’s, maintains himself in the 
critical atmosphere of Berlin. One might wonder that this state of things should have continued unaltered for 
several years if one did not know that the account I have given only represents external appearances. Too 
much significance should not be attributed to rejection by the official representatives of science and heads 
of institutions, and by the followers dependent on them. It is natural that its opponents should give loud 
expression to their views, while its intimidated adherents keep silence. Some of the latter, whose first 
contributions to analysis raised favourable expectations, have later withdrawn from the movement under 
the pressure of circumstances. The movement itself advances surely though silently; it is constantly gaining 
new adherents among psychiatrists and laymen, it brings in a growing stream of new readers for psycho- 
analytic literature and for that very reason drives its opponents to ever more violent defensive efforts. At 
least a dozen times in recent years, in reports of the proceedings of certain congresses and scientific 
bodies or in reviews of certain publications, I have read that now psycho-analysis is dead, defeated and 
disposed of once and for all. The best answer to all this would be in the terms of Mark Twain’s telegram to 
the newspaper which had falsely published news of his death: ‘Report of my death greatly exaggerated.’ 
After each of these obituaries psycho-analysis regularly gained new adherents and co-workers or acquired 
new channels of publicity. After all, being declared dead was an advance on being buried in silence. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2901 


Hand in hand with this expansion of psycho-analysis in space went an expansion in content; it extended 
from the field of the neuroses and psychiatry to other fields of knowledge. I shall not treat this aspect of the 
development of our discipline in much detail, since this has been done with great success by Rank and 
Sachs in a volume (one of Lowenfeld’s Grenzfragen) which deals exhaustively with precisely this side of 
analytic research. Moreover, this development is still in its infancy; it has been little worked at, consists 
mostly of tentative beginnings and in part of no more than plans. No reasonable person will see any 
grounds for reproach in this. An enormous mass of work confronts a small number of workers, most of 
whom have their main occupation elsewhere and can bring only the qualifications of an amateur to bear on 
the technical problems of these unfamiliar fields of science. These workers, who derive from psycho- 
analysis, make no secret of their amateurishness. Their aim is merely to act as sign-posts and stop-gaps 
for the specialists, and to put the analytic technique and principles at their disposal against a time when 
they in turn shall take up the work. That the results achieved are nevertheless not inconsiderable is due 
partly to the fruitfulness of the analytic method, and partly to the circumstance that there are already a few 
investigators who are not doctors, and have taken up the application of psycho-analysis to the mental 
sciences as their profession in life. 

Most of these applications of analysis naturally go back to a hint in my earliest analytic writings. The 
analytic examination of neurotic people and the neurotic symptoms of normal people necessitated the 
assumption of psychological conditions which could not possibly be limited to the field in which they had 
been discovered. In this way analysis not only provided us with the explanation of pathological phenomena, 
but revealed their connection with normal mental life and disclosed unsuspected relationships between 
psychiatry and the most various other sciences dealing with activities of the mind. Certain typical dreams, 
for instance, yielded an explanation of some myths and fairy-tales. Riklin and Abraham followed this hint 
and initiated the researches into myths which have found their completion, in a manner complying with 
even expert standards, in Rank’s works on mythology. Further investigation into dream-symbolism led to 
the heart of the problems of mythology, folklore (Jones and Storfer) and the abstractions of religion. A deep 
impression was made on all hearers at one of the psycho-analytical Congresses when a follower of Jung’s 
demonstrated the correspondence between schizophrenic phantasies and the cosmogonies of primitive 
times and races. Mythological material later received further elaboration (which, though open to criticism, 
was none the less very interesting) at the hands of Jung, in works attempting to correlate the neuroses with 
religious and mythological phantasies. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2902 

Another path led from the investigation of dreams to the analysis of works of imagination and ultimately to 
the analysis of their creators - writers and artists themselves. At an early stage it was discovered that 
dreams invented by writers will often yield to analysis in the same way as genuine ones. (Cf. ‘Gradiva’.) The 
conception of unconscious mental activity made it possible to form a preliminary idea of the nature of 
imaginative creative writing; and the realization, gained in the study of neurotics, of the part played by the 
instinctual impulses enabled us to perceive the sources of artistic production and confronted us with two 
problems: how the artist reacts to this instigation and what means he employs to disguise his reactions. 1 
Most analysts with general interests have contributed something to the solution of these problems, which 
are the most fascinating among the applications of psycho-analysis. Naturally, opposition was not lacking in 
this direction either on the part of people who knew nothing of analysis; it took the same form as it did in the 
original field of psycho-analytic research - the same misconceptions and vehement rejections. It was only to 
be expected from the beginning that, whatever the regions into which psycho-analysis might penetrate, it 
would inevitably experience the same struggles with those already in possession of the field. These 
attempted invasions, however, have not yet stirred up the attention in some quarters which awaits them in 
the future. Among the strictly scientific applications of analysis to literature, Rank’s exhaustive work on the 
theme of incest easily takes the first place. Its subject is bound to arouse the greatest unpopularity. Up to 
the present, little work based on psycho-analysis has been done in the sciences of language and history. I 
myself ventured the first approach to the problems of the psychology of religion by drawing a parallel 
between religious ritual and the ceremonials of neurotics (1907b). Dr. Pfister, a pastor in Zurich, has traced 
back the origin of religious fanaticism to perverse eroticism in his book on the piety of Count von 
Zinzendorf, as well as in other contributions. In the latest works of the Zurich school, however, we find 
analysis permeated with religious ideas rather than the opposite outcome that had been in view. 

1 Cf. Rank’s Die Kunstler [The Artist], analyses of imaginative writers by Sadger, Reik, and others, my own small work 
on a childhood memory of Leonardo da Vinci’s, and Abraham’s analysis of Segantini. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2903 


In the four essays with the title Totem and Taboo I have made an attempt to deal with the problems of 
social anthropology in the light of analysis; this line of investigation leads direct to the origins of the most 
important institutions of our civilization, of the structure of the state, of morality and religion, and, moreover, 
of the prohibition against incest and of conscience. It is no doubt too early to decide how far the conclusions 
thus reached will be able to withstand criticism. 

The first example of an application of the analytic mode of thought to the problems of aesthetics was 
contained in my book on jokes. Everything beyond this is still awaiting workers, who may expect a 
particularly rich harvest in this field. We are entirely without the co-operation of specialists in all these 
branches of knowledge, and in order to attract them Hanns Sachs, in 1912, founded the periodical Imago 
which is edited by him and Rank. A beginning has been made by Hitschmann and von Winterstein in 
throwing psycho-analytic light on philosophical systems and personalities, and here there is much need 
both of extended and of deeper investigation. 

The revolutionary discoveries of psycho-analysis in regard to the mental life of children - the part played 
in it by sexual impulses (von Hug-Hellmuth), and the fate of those components of sexuality which become 
unserviceable in the function of reproduction - were bound early to direct attention to education and to 
stimulate an attempt to bring analytic points of view into the foreground in that field of work. Recognition is 
due to Dr. Pfister for having, with sincere enthusiasm, initiated the application of psycho-analysis in this 
direction and brought it to the notice of ministers of religion and those concerned with education. (Cf. The 
Psycho-Analytic Method, 1913.) He has succeeded in gaining the sympathy and participation of a number 
of Swiss teachers in this. Other members of his profession are said to share his views but to have preferred 
nevertheless to remain cautiously in the background. In their retreat from psycho-analysis, a section of 
Vienna analysts seem to have arrived at a kind of combination of medicine and education. 1 

1 Adler and Furtmuller, Heilen und Bilden [Healing and Educating], 1914. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2904 


With this incomplete outline I have attempted to give some idea of the still incalculable wealth of 
connections which have come to light between medical psycho-analysis and other fields of science. There 
is material here for a generation of investigators to work at, and I do not doubt that the work will be carried 
out as soon as the resistances against psycho-analysis are overcome on its original ground . 1 

To write the story of these resistances would, I think, be both fruitless and inopportune at the present 
time. The story is not very creditable to the scientific men of our day. But I must add at once that it has 
never occurred to me to pour contempt upon the opponents of psycho-analysis merely because they were 
opponents - apart from the few unworthy individuals, the adventurers and profiteers, who are always to be 
found on both sides in time of war. I knew very well how to account for the behaviour of these opponents 
and, moreover, I had learnt that psycho-analysis brings out the worst in everyone. But I made up my mind 
not to answer my opponents and, so far as my influence went, to restrain others from polemics. Under the 
peculiar conditions of the controversy over psycho-analysis it seemed to me very doubtful whether either 
public or written discussion would avail anything; it was certain which way the majority at congresses and 
meetings would go, and my faith in the reasonableness and good behaviour of the gentlemen who opposed 
me was not at any time great. Experience shows that only very few people are capable of remaining polite, 
to say nothing of objective, in a scientific dispute, and the impression made on me by scientific squabbles 
has always been odious. Perhaps this attitude on my part has been misunderstood; perhaps I have been 
thought so good-natured or so easily intimidated that no further notice need be taken of me. This was a 
mistake; I can be as abusive and enraged as anyone; but I have not the art of expressing the underlying 
emotions in a form suitable for publication and I therefore prefer to abstain completely. 


1 See my two articles in Scienta (1913/). 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2905 


Perhaps in some respects it would have been better if I had given free rein to my own passions and to 
those of others round me. We have all heard of the interesting attempt to explain psycho-analysis as a 
product of the Vienna milieu. As recently as in 1913 Janet was not ashamed to use this argument, although 
he himself is no doubt proud of being a Parisian, and Paris can scarcely claim to be a city of stricter morals 
than Vienna. The suggestion is that psycho-analysis, and in particular its assertion that the neuroses are 
traceable to disturbances in sexual life, could only have originated in a town like Vienna - in an atmosphere 
of sensuality and immorality foreign to other cities - and that it is simply a reflection, a projection into theory, 
as it were, of these peculiar Viennese conditions. Now I am certainly no local patriot; but this theory about 
psycho-analysis always seems to me quite exceptionally senseless - so senseless, in fact, that I have 
sometimes been inclined to suppose that the reproach of being a citizen of Vienna is only a euphemistic 
substitute for another reproach which no one would care to put forward openly. If the premisses on which 
the argument rests were the opposite of what they are, then it might be worth giving it a hearing. If there 
were a town in which the inhabitants imposed exceptional restrictions on themselves as regards sexual 
satisfaction, and if at the same time they exhibited a marked tendency to severe neurotic disorders, that 
town might certainly give rise in an observer’s mind to the idea that the two circumstances had some 
connection with each other, and might suggest that one was contingent on the other. But neither of these 
assumptions is true of Vienna. The Viennese are no more abstinent and no more neurotic than the 
inhabitants of any other capital city. There is rather less embarrassment - less prudery - in regard to sexual 
relationships than in the cities of the West and North which are so proud of their chastity. These peculiar 
characteristics of Vienna would be more likely to mislead the observer on the causation of neurosis than to 
enlighten him on it. 

Vienna has done everything possible, however, to deny her share in the origin of psycho-analysis. In no 
other place is the hostile indifference of the learned and educated section of the population so evident to 
the analyst as in Vienna. 

It may be that my policy of avoiding wide publicity is to some extent responsible for this. If I had 
encouraged or allowed the medical societies of Vienna to occupy themselves with psycho-analysis in 
stormy debates which would have discharged all the passions and brought into the open all the reproaches 
and invectives that were on its opponents’ tongues or in their hearts - then, perhaps, the ban on psycho- 
analysis would have been overcome by now and it would no longer be a stranger in its native city. As it is, 
the poet may be right when he makes his Wallenstein say: 

Doch das vergeben mir die Wiener nicht, 
dass ich um ein Spektakel sie betrog . 1 

1 [Literally: ‘But what the Viennese will not forgive me is having cheated them out of a spectacle.’] 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2906 


The task to which I was not equal - that of demonstrating to the opponents of psycho-analysis suaviter in 
modo their injustice and arbitrariness - was undertaken and carried out most creditably by Bleuler in a 
paper written in 1910, ‘Freud’s Psycho-Analysis: A Defence and Some Critical Remarks’. It would seem so 
natural for me to praise this work (which offers criticisms in both directions) that I will hasten to say what I 
take exception to in it. It seems to me still to display partiality, to be too lenient to the faults of the opponents 
of psycho-analysis and too severe on the shortcomings of its adherents, this trait in it may possibly explain 
why the opinion of a psychiatrist of such high repute, such undoubted ability and independence, failed to 
carry more weight with his colleagues. The author of Affectivity (1906) ought not to be surprised if the 
influence of a work is determined not by the strength of its arguments but by its affective tone. Another part 
of its influence - its influence on the followers of psycho-analysis - was destroyed later by Bleuler himself, 
when in 1913 he showed the reverse side of his attitude to psycho-analysis in his ‘Criticism of the Freudian 
Theory’. In that paper he subtracts so much from the structure of psycho-analytic theory that our opponents 
may well be glad of the help given them by this champion of psycho-analysis. These adverse judgements of 
Bleuler’s, however, are not based on new arguments or better observations. They rely simply on the state 
of his own knowledge, the inadequacy of which he no longer himself admits, as he did in his earlier works. 

It seemed therefore that an almost irreparable loss threatened psycho-analysis here. But in his last 
publication, ‘Criticisms of my Schizophrenia' (1914), Bleuler rallies his forces in the face of the attacks 
made on him for having introduced psycho-analysis into his book on schizophrenia, and makes what he 
himself calls a ‘presumptuous claim’. ‘But now I will make a presumptuous claim: I consider that up to the 
present the various schools of psychology have contributed extremely little towards explaining the nature of 
psychogenic symptoms and diseases, but that depth-psychology offers something towards a psychology 
which still awaits creation and which physicians are in need of in order to understand their patients and to 
cure them rationally; and I even believe that in my Schizophrenia I have taken a very short step towards 
that understanding. The first two assertions are certainly correct; the last may be an error.’ 

Since by ‘depth-psychology’ he means nothing else but psycho-analysis, we may for the present be 
content with this acknowledgement. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2907 


III 

Mach es kurz! 

Am Jungsten Tag ist’s nur ein Furz! 1 

GOETHE 

Two years after the first private Congress of psycho-analysts the second took place, this time at 
Nuremberg, in March, 1910. In the interval between them, influenced partly by the favourable reception in 
America, by the increasing hostility in German-speaking countries, and by the unforeseen acquisition of 
support from Zurich, I had conceived a project which with the help of my friend Ferenczi I carried out at this 
second Congress. What I had in mind was to organize the psycho-analytic movement, to transfer its centre 
to Zurich and to give it a chief who would look after its future career. As this scheme has met with much 
opposition among the adherents of psycho-analysis, I will set out my reasons for it in some detail. I hope 
that these will justify me, even though it turns out that what I did was in fact not very wise. 

I judged that the new movement’s association with Vienna was no recommendation but rather a handicap 
to it. A place in the heart of Europe like Zurich, where an academic teacher had opened the doors of his 
institution to psycho-analysis, seemed to me much more promising. I also took it that a second handicap lay 
in my own person, opinion about which was too much confused by the liking or hatred of the different sides: 

I was either compared to Columbus, Darwin and Kepler, or abused as a general paralytic. I wished, 
therefore, to withdraw into the background both myself and the city where psycho-analysis first saw the 
light. Moreover, I was no longer young; I saw that there was a long road ahead, and I felt oppressed by the 
thought that the duty of being a leader should fall to me so late in life. Yet I felt that there must be someone 
at the head. I knew only too well the pitfalls that lay in wait for anyone who became engaged in analysis, 
and hoped that many of them might be avoided if an authority could be set up who would be prepared to 
instruct and admonish. This position had at first been occupied by myself, owing to my fifteen years’ start in 
experience which nothing could counterbalance. I felt the need of transferring this authority to a younger 
man, who would then as a matter of course take my place after my death. This man could only be C. G. 
Jung, since Bleuler was my contemporary in age; in favour of Jung were his exceptional talents, the 
contributions he had already made to psycho-analysis, his independent position and the impression of 
assured energy which his personality conveyed. In addition to this, he seemed ready to enter into a friendly 
relationship with me and for my sake to give up certain racial prejudices which he had previously permitted 
himself. I had no inkling at that time that in spite of all these advantages the choice was a most unfortunate 
one, that I had lighted upon a person who was incapable of tolerating the authority of another, but who was 
still less capable of wielding it himself, and whose energies were relentlessly devoted to the furtherance of 
his own interests. 

I considered it necessary to form an official association because I feared the abuses to which psycho- 
analysis would be subjected as soon as it became popular. There should be some headquarters whose 
business it would be to declare: ‘All this nonsense is nothing to do with analysis; this is not psycho- 
analysis.’ At the sessions of the local groups (which together would constitute the international association) 
instruction should be given as to how psycho-analysis was to be conducted and doctors should be trained, 
whose activities would then receive a kind of guarantee. Moreover, it seemed to me desirable, since official 
science had pronounced its solemn ban upon psycho-analysis and had declared a boycott against doctors 
and institutions practising it, that the adherents of psycho-analysis should come together for friendly 
communication with one another and mutual support. 

1 [Literally: ‘Cut it short! On the Day of Judgement it is no more than a fart.’] 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2908 


This and nothing else was what I hoped to achieve by founding the ‘International Psycho-Analytical 
Association’. It was probably more than could be attained. Just as my opponents were to discover that it 
was not possible to stem the tide of the new movement, so I was to find that it would not proceed in the 
direction I wished to mark out for it. The proposals made by Ferenczi in Nuremburg were adopted, it is true; 
Jung was elected President and made Riklin his Secretary; the publication of a bulletin which should link 
the Central Executive with the local groups was resolved upon. The object of the Association was declared 
to be ‘to foster and further the science of psycho-analysis founded by Freud, both as pure psychology and 
in its application to medicine and the mental sciences; and to promote mutual support among its members 
in all endeavours to acquire and to spread psycho-analytic knowledge'. The scheme was strongly opposed 
only by the Vienna group. Adler, in great excitement, expressed the fear that ‘censorship and restrictions on 
scientific freedom’ were intended. Finally the Viennese gave in, after having secured that the seat of the 
Association should be not Zurich, but the place of residence of the President for the time being, who was to 
be elected for two years. 

At this Congress three local groups were constituted: one in Berlin, under the chairmanship of Abraham; 
one in Zurich, whose head had become the President of the whole Association; and one in Vienna, the 
direction of which I made over to Adler. A fourth group, in Budapest, could not be formed until later. Bleuler 
had not attended the Congress on account of illness, and later he evinced hesitation about joining the 
Association on general grounds; he let himself be persuaded to do so, it is true, after a personal 
conversation with me, but resigned again shortly afterwards as a result of disagreements in Zurich. This 
severed the connection between the Zurich local group and the Burgholzli institution. 

One outcome of the Nuremberg Congress was the founding of the Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse [Central 
Journal for Psycho-analysis], for which purpose Adler and Stekel joined forces. It was obviously intended 
originally to represent the Opposition: it was meant to win back for Vienna the hegemony threatened by the 
election of Jung. But when the two founders of the journal, labouring under the difficulties of finding a 
publisher, assured me of their peaceful intentions and as a guarantee of their sincerity gave me a right of 
veto, I accepted the direction of it and worked energetically for the new organ; its first number appeared in 
September, 1910. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2909 


I will now continue the story of the Psycho-Analytical Congresses. The third Congress took place in 
September, 1911, at Weimar, and was even more successful than the previous ones in its general 
atmosphere and scientific interest. J. J. Putnam, who was present on this occasion, declared afterwards in 
America how much pleasure it had given him and expressed his respect for ‘the mental attitude’ of those 
who attended it, quoting some words I was said to have used in reference to them: They have learnt to 
tolerate a bit of truth.’ (Putnam 1912.) It is a fact that no one who had attended scientific congresses could 
have failed to carry away a favourable impression of the Psycho-Analytical Association. I myself had 
conducted the first two Congresses and I had allowed every speaker time for his paper, leaving discussions 
to take place in private afterwards among the members. Jung, as President, took over the direction at 
Weimar and re-introduced formal discussions after each paper, which, however, did not give rise to any 
difficulties as yet. 

Avery different picture was presented by the fourth Congress, held in Munich two years later, in 
September, 1913. It is still fresh in the memory of all who were present. It was conducted by Jung in a 
disagreeable and incorrect manner; the speakers were restricted in time and the discussions overwhelmed 
the papers. By a malicious stroke of chance it happened that that evil genius, Hoche, had settled in the very 
building in which the meetings were held. Hoche would have had no difficulty in convincing himself of the 
nonsense which the analysts made of his description of them as a fanatical sect blindly submissive to their 
leader. The fatiguing and unedifying proceedings ended in the re-election of Jung to the Presidency of the 
International Psycho-Analytical Association, which he accepted, although two-fifths of those present 
refused him their support. We dispersed without any desire to meet again. 

At about the time of this Congress the strength of the International Psycho-Analytical Association was as 
follows. The local groups in Vienna, Berlin and Zurich had been formed at the Congress in Nuremberg as 
early as 1910. In May, 1911, a group at Munich under the chairmanship of Dr. L. Seif was added. In the 
same year the first American local group was formed under the chairmanship of A. A. Brill, with the name 
The New York Psychoanalytic Society’. At the Weimar Congress the foundation of a second American 
group was authorized; it came into existence during the following year under the name of The American 
Psychoanalytic Association’, and included members from Canada and the whole of America; Putnam was 
elected President and Ernest Jones Secretary. Shortly before the Congress in Munich in 1913, the 
Budapest local group was formed under the chairmanship of Ferenczi. Soon after this the first English 
group was formed by Ernest Jones, who had returned to London. The membership of these local groups, of 
which there were now eight, naturally affords no means of estimating the number of unorganized students 
and adherents of psycho-analysis. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2910 

The development of the periodicals devoted to psycho-analysis also deserves a brief mention. The first of 
these was a series of monographs entitled Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde [‘Papers on Applied 
Mental Science’] which have appeared irregularly since 1907 and now number fifteen issues. (The 
publisher was to begin with Heller in Vienna and later F. Deuticke.) They comprise works by Freud (Nos. 1 
and 7), Riklin, Jung, Abraham (Nos. 4 and 11), Rank (Nos. 5 and 13), Sadger, Pfister, Max Graf, Jones 
(Nos. 10 and 14), Storfer and von Hug-Hellmuth. 1 When the journal Imago (which will be referred to shortly) 
was founded, this form of publication ceased to have quite the same value. After the meeting at Salzburg in 
1908, the Jahrbuch fur psychoanalytische und psychopathologische Forschungen [Yearbook for Psycho- 
Analytic and Psychopathological Researches] was founded, which appeared for two years under Jung’s 
editorship and has now re-emerged, under two new editors and with a slight change in its title, as the 
Jahrbuch der Psychoanalyse [Yearbook of Psycho-Analysis.] It is no longer intended to be, as it has been 
in recent years, merely repository for the publication of self-contained works. Instead it will endeavour, 
through the activity of its editors, to fulfil the aim of recording all the work done and all the advances made 
in the sphere of psycho-analysis. 2 The Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, which, as I have already said, was 
started by Adler and Stekel after the foundation of the International Psycho-Analytical Association in 
Nuremberg in 1910, has, during its short existence, had a stormy career. As early as in the tenth number of 
the first volume an announcement appeared on the front page that, on account of scientific differences of 
opinion with the director, Dr. Alfred Adler had decided to withdraw voluntarily from the editorship. After this 
Dr. Stekel remained the only editor (from the summer of 1911). At the Weimar Congress the Zentralblatt 
was raised to the position of official organ of the International Association and made available to all 
members in return for an increase in the annual subscription. From the third number of the second volume 
onwards (winter, 1912) Stekel became solely responsible for its contents. His behaviour, of which it is not 
easy to publish an account, had compelled me to resign the direction and hurriedly to establish a new organ 
for psycho-analysis - the Internationale Zeitschrift fur arztliche Psychoanalyse [International Journal for 
Medical Psycho-Analysis], The combined efforts of almost all our workers and of Hugo Heller, the new 
publisher, resulted in the appearance of the first number in January, 1913, whereupon it took the place of 
the Zentralblatt as official organ of the International Psycho-Analytical Association. 

1 [Footnote added 1924:] Since then, further works have appeared, by Sadger (Nos. 16 and 18) and Kielholz (No. 17). 

2 [Footnote added 1924:] It ceased publication at the beginning of the War. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2911 


Meanwhile, early in 1912, a new periodical, Imago (published by Heller), designed exclusively for the 
application of psycho-analysis to the mental sciences, was founded by Dr. Hanns Sachs and Dr. Otto Rank. 
Imago is now in the middle of its third volume and is read with interest by a continually increasing number of 
subscribers, some of whom have little connection with medical analysis. 1 

Apart from these four periodical publications ( Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde, Jahrbuch, 
Zeitschrift and Imago) other German and foreign journals publish works which may claim a place in the 
literature of psycho-analysis. The Journal of Abnormal Psychology, directed by Morton Prince, usually 
contains so many good analytic contributions that it must be regarded as the principal representative of 
analytic literature in America. In the winter of 1913, White and Jelliffe in New York started a new periodical 
(The Psychoanalytic Revue) which is devoted exclusively to psycho-analysis, no doubt bearing in mind the 
fact that most medical men in America who are interested in analysis find the German language a difficulty. 2 

I must now mention two secessions which have taken place among the adherents of psycho-analysis; the 
first occurred between the founding of the Association in 1910 and the Weimar Congress in 1911; the 
second took place after this and became manifest at Munich in 1913. The disappointment that they caused 
me might have been averted if I had paid more attention to the reactions of patients under analytic 
treatment. I knew very well of course that anyone may take to flight at his first approach to the unwelcome 
truths of analysis; I had always myself maintained that everyone's understanding of it is limited by his own 
repressions (or rather, by the resistances which sustain them) so that he cannot go beyond a particular 
point in his relation to analysis. But I had not expected that anyone who had reached a certain depth in his 
understanding of analysis could renounce that understanding and lose it. And yet daily experience with 
patients had shown that total rejection of analytic knowledge may result whenever a specially strong 
resistance arises at any depth in the mind; one may have succeeded in laboriously bringing a patient to 
grasp some parts of analytic knowledge and to handle them like possessions of his own, and yet one may 
see him, under the domination of the very next resistance, throw all he has learnt to the winds and stand on 
the defensive as he did in the days when he was a carefree beginner. I had to learn that the very same 
thing can happen with psycho-analysts as with patients in analysis. 

1 [Footnote added 1924:] The publication of these two periodicals was transferred in 1919 to the Internationaler 
Psychoanalytischer Verlag [the International Psycho-Analytical Publishing House]. At the present time (1923) they are 
both in their ninth volume. (Actually, Internationale Zeitschrift is in the eleventh and Imago in the twelfth year of its 
existence, but, in consequence of events during the war, Volume IV of the Zeitschrift covered more than one year, i.e. 
the years 1916-18, and Volume V of Imago the years 1917-18.) With the beginning of Volume VI the word ‘arztliche' 
[‘medical’] was dropped from the title of the Internationale Zeitschrift. 

2 [Footnote added 1924:] In 1920 Ernest Jones undertook the founding of The International Journal of Psycho- 
Analysis, intended for readers in England and America. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2912 


It is no easy or enviable task to write the history of these two secessions, partly because I am without any 
strong personal motive for doing so - I had not expected gratitude nor am I revengeful to any effective 
degree - and partly because I know that by doing so I shall lay myself open to the invectives of my not too 
scrupulous opponents and offer the enemies of analysis the spectacle they so heartily desire - of ‘the 
psycho-analysts tearing one another limb from limb’. After exercising so much self-restraint in not coming to 
blows with opponents outside of analysis, I now see myself compelled to take up arms against its former 
followers or people who still like to call themselves its followers. I have no choice in the matter, however; 
only indolence or cowardice could lead one to keep silence, and silence would cause more harm than a 
frank revelation of the harms that already exist. Anyone who has followed the growth of other scientific 
movements will know that the same upheavals and dissensions commonly occur in them as well. It may be 
that elsewhere they are more carefully concealed; but psycho-analysis, which repudiates so many 
conventional ideals, is more honest in these matters too. 

Another very severe drawback is that I cannot entirely avoid throwing some analytic light on these two 
opposition movements. Analysis is not suited, however, for polemical use; it presupposes the consent of 
the person who is being analysed and a situation in which there is a superior and a subordinate. Anyone, 
therefore, who undertakes an analysis for polemical purposes must expect the person analysed to use 
analysis against him in turn, so that the discussion will reach a state which entirely excludes the possibility 
of convincing any impartial third person. I shall therefore restrict to a minimum my use of analytic 
knowledge, and, with it, of indiscretion and aggressiveness towards my opponents; and I may also point out 
that I am not basing any scientific criticism on these grounds. I am not concerned with the truth that may be 
contained in the theories which I am rejecting, nor shall I attempt to refute them. I shall leave that task to 
other qualified workers in the field of psycho-analysis, and it has, indeed, already been partly accomplished. 
I wish merely to show that these theories controvert the fundamental principles of analysis (and on what 
points they controvert them) and that for this reason they should not be known by the name of analysis. So 
I shall avail myself of analysis only in order to explain how these divergences from it could arise among 
analysts. When I come to the points at which the divergences occurred, I shall have, it is true, to defend the 
just rights of psycho-analysis with some remarks of a purely critical nature. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2913 


The first task confronting psycho-analysis was to explain the neuroses; it used the two facts of resistance 
and transference as starting-points, and, taking into consideration the third fact of amnesia, accounted for 
them with its theories of repression, of the sexual motive forces in neurosis and of the unconscious. 
Psycho-analysis has never claimed to provide a complete theory of human mentality in general, but only 
expected that what it offered should be applied to supplement and correct the knowledge acquired by other 
means. Adler’s theory, however, goes far beyond this point; it seeks at one stroke to explain the behaviour 
and character of human beings as well as their neurotic and psychotic illnesses. It is actually more suited to 
any other field than that of neurosis, although for reasons connected with the history of its development it 
still places this in the foreground. For many years I had opportunities of studying Dr. Adler and have never 
refused to recognize his unusual ability, combined with a particularly speculative disposition. As an instance 
of the ‘persecution’ to which he asserts he has been subjected by me, I can point to the fact that after the 
Association was founded I made over to him the leadership of the Vienna group. It was not until urgent 
demands were put forward by all the members of the society that I let myself be persuaded to take the chair 
again at its scientific meetings. When I perceived how little gift Adler had precisely for judging unconscious 
material, my view changed to an expectation that he would succeed in discovering the connections of 
psycho-analysis with psychology and with the biological foundations of instinctual processes - an 
expectation which was in some sense justified by the valuable work he had done on ‘organ-inferiority’. And 
he did in fact effect something of the kind; but his work conveys an impression ‘as if - to speak in his own 
‘jargon’ - it was intended to prove that psycho-analysis was wrong in everything and that it had only 
attributed so much importance to sexual motive forces because of its credulity in accepting the assertions 
of neurotics. I may even speak publicly of the personal motive for his work, since he himself announced it in 
the presence of a small circle of members of the Vienna group: - ‘ Do you think it gives me such great 
pleasure to stand in your shadow my whole life long?’ To be sure, I see nothing reprehensible in a younger 
man freely admitting his ambition, which one would in any case guess was among the incentives for his 
work. But even though a man is dominated by a motive of this kind he should know how to avoid being 
what the English, with their fine social tact, call ‘unfair’ - which in German can only be expressed by a much 
cruder word. How little Adler has succeeded in this is shown by the profusion of petty outbursts of malice 
which disfigure his writings and by the indications they contain of an uncontrolled craving for priority. At the 
Vienna Psych o-Analyti cal Society we once actually heard him claim priority for the conception of the ‘unity 
of the neuroses’ and for the ‘dynamic view’ of them. This came as a great surprise to me, for I had always 
believed that these two principles were stated by me before I ever made Adler’s acquaintance. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2914 

This striving of Adler’s for a place in the sun has, however, had one result which is bound to be beneficial 
to psycho-analysis. When, after irreconcilable scientific disagreements had come to light, I was obliged to 
bring about Adler’s resignation from the editorship of the Zentralblatt, he left the Vienna society as well, and 
founded a new one, which at first adopted the tasteful name of The Society for Free Psycho-Analysis’ 
[‘Verein fur freie Psychoanalyse’]. But outsiders who are unconnected with analysis are evidently as 
unskilful in appreciating the differences between the views of two psycho-analysts as we Europeans are in 
detecting the differences between two Chinese faces. ‘Free’ psycho-analysis remained in the shadow of 
‘official’, ‘orthodox’ psycho-analysis and was treated merely as an appendage to the latter. Then Adler took 
a step for which we are thankful; he severed all connection with psycho-analysis, and gave his theory the 
name of ‘Individual Psychology’. There is room enough on God’s earth, and anyone who can has a perfect 
right to potter about on it without being prevented; but it is not a desirable thing for people who have ceased 
to understand one another and have grown incompatible with one another to remain under the same roof. 
Adler’s ‘Individual Psychology’ is now one of the many schools of psychology which are adverse to psycho- 
analysis and its further development is no concern of ours. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2915 


The Adlerian theory was from the very beginning a ‘system’ - which psycho-analysis was careful to avoid 
becoming. It is also a remarkably good example of ‘secondary revision’, such as occurs, for instance, in the 
process to which dream-material is submitted by the action of waking thought. In Adler’s case the place of 
dream-material is taken by the new material obtained through psycho-analytic studies; this is then viewed 
purely from the standpoint of the ego, reduced to the categories with which the ego is familiar, translated, 
twisted and - exactly as happens in dream-formation - is misunderstood. Moreover, the Adlerian theory is 
characterized less by what it asserts than by what it denies, so that it consists of three sorts of elements of 
quite dissimilar value: useful contributions to the psychology of the ego, superfluous but admissible 
translations of the analytic facts into the new ‘jargon’, and distortions and perversions of these facts when 
they do not comply with the requirements of the ego. 

The elements of the first sort have never been ignored by psycho-analysis, although they did not deserve 
any special attention from it; it was more concerned to show that every ego-trend contains libidinal 
components. The Adlerian theory emphasises the counterpart to this, the egoistic constituent in libidinal 
instinctual impulses. This would have been an appreciable gain if Adler had not on every occasion used this 
observation in order to deny the libidinal impulses in favour of their egoistic instinctual components. His 
theory does what every patient does and what our conscious thought in general does - namely, makes use 
of a rationalization, as Jones has called it, in order to conceal the unconscious motive. Adler is so 
consistent in this that he positively considers that the strongest motive force in the sexual act is the man’s 
intention of showing himself master of the woman - of being ‘on top’. I do not know if he has expressed 
these monstrous notions in his writings. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2916 


Psycho-analysis recognized early that every neurotic symptom owes its possibility of existence to a 
compromise. Every symptom must therefore in some way comply with the demands of the ego which 
manipulates the repression; it must offer some advantage, it must admit of some useful application, or it 
would meet with the same fate as the original instinctual impulse itself which has been fended off. The term 
‘gain from illness’ has taken this into account; one is even justified in differentiating the ‘primary’ gain to the 
ego, which must be operative at the time of the generation of the symptom, from a ‘secondary’ part, which 
supervenes in attachment to other purposes of the ego, if the symptom is to persist. It has also long been 
known that the withdrawal of this gain from illness, or its disappearance in consequence of some change in 
real external circumstances, constitutes one of the mechanisms of a cure of the symptom. In the Adlerian 
doctrine the main emphasis falls on these easily verifiable and clearly intelligible connections, while the fact 
is altogether overlooked that on countless occasions the ego is merely making a virtue of necessity in 
submitting, because of its usefulness, to the very disagreeable symptom which is forced upon it - for 
instance, in accepting anxiety as a means to security. The ego is here playing the ludicrous part of the 
clown in a circus who by his gestures tries to convince the audience that every change in the circus ring is 
being carried out under his orders. But only the youngest of the spectators are deceived by him. 

Psycho-analysis is obliged to give its backing to the second constituent of Adler’s theory as it would to 
something of its own. And in fact it is nothing else than psycho-analytic knowledge, which that author 
extracted from sources open to everyone during ten years of work in common and which he has now 
labelled as his own by a change in nomenclature. I myself consider ‘safeguarding [ Sicherung ]’, for instance, 
a better term than ‘protective measure [Schutzmassregef]’ which is the one I employ; but I cannot discover 
any difference in their meaning. Again, a host of familiar features come to light in Adler’s propositions when 
one restores the earlier ‘phantasied’ and ‘phantasy’ in place of ‘feigned [fingiert]’, ‘fictive’ and ‘fiction’. The 
identity of these terms would be insisted upon by psycho-analysis even if their author had not taken part in 
our common work over a period of many years. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2917 


The third part of the Adlerian theory, the twisted interpretations and distortions of the disagreeable facts of 
analysis, are what definitely separate ‘Individual Psychology’, as it is now to be called, from psycho- 
analysis. As we know, the principle of Adler’s system is that the individual’s aim of self-assertion, his ‘will to 
power’, is what, in the form of a ‘masculine protest’, plays a dominating part in the conduct of life, in 
character-formation and in neurosis. This ‘masculine protest’, the Adlerian motive force, is nothing else, 
however, but repression detached from its psychological mechanism and, moreover, sexualized in addition 
- which ill accords with the vaunted ejection of sexuality from its place in mental life. The ‘masculine protest’ 
undoubtedly exists, but if it is made into the motive force of mental life the observed facts are being treated 
like a spring-board that is left behind after it has been used to jump off from. Let us consider one of the 
fundamental situations in which desire is felt in infancy: that of a child observing the sexual act between 
adults. Analysis shows, in the case of people with whose life-story the physician will later be concerned, 
that at such moments two impulses take possession of the immature spectator. In boys, one is the impulse 
to put himself in the place of the active man, and the other, the opposing current, is the impulse to identify 
himself with the passive woman. Between them these two impulses exhaust the pleasurable possibilities of 
the situation. The first alone can come under the head of the masculine protest, if that concept is to retain 
any meaning at all. The second, however, the further course of which Adler disregards or which he knows 
nothing about, is the one that will become the more important in the subsequent neurosis. Adler has so 
merged himself in the jealous narrowness of the ego that he takes account only of those instinctual 
impulses which are agreeable to the ego and are encouraged by it; the situation in neurosis, in which the 
impulses are opposed to the ego, is precisely the one that lies beyond his horizon. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2918 

In connection with the attempt, which psycho-analysis has made necessary, to correlate the fundamental 
principle of its theory with the mental life of children, Adler exhibits the most serious departures from actual 
observation and the most fundamental confusion in his concepts. The biological, social and psychological 
meanings of ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ are here hopelessly mixed. It is impossible, and is disproved by 
observation, that a child, whether male or female, should found the plan of its life on an original 
depreciation of the female sex and take the wish to be a real man as its ‘guiding line’. Children have, to 
begin with, no idea of the significance of the distinction between the sexes; on the contrary, they start with 
the assumption that the same genital organ (the male one) is possessed by both sexes; they do not begin 
their sexual researches with the problem of the distinction between the sexes, while the social 
underestimation of women is completely foreign to them. There are women in whose neurosis the wish to 
be a man has played no part. Whatever in the nature of a masculine protest can be shown to exist is easily 
traceable to a disturbance in primary narcissism due to threats of castration or to the earliest interferences 
with sexual activities. All disputes about the psychogenesis of the neuroses must eventually be decided in 
the field of the neuroses of childhood. Careful dissection of a neurosis in early childhood puts an end to all 
misapprehensions about the aetiology of the neuroses and to all doubts about the part played by the sexual 
instincts in them. That is why, in his criticism of Jung’s paper ‘Conflicts in the Mind of the Child’, Adler was 
obliged to resort to the imputation that the facts of the case had been one-sidedly arranged, ‘no doubt by 
the father’. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2919 


I will not dwell any longer on the biological aspect of the Adlerian theory nor discuss whether either actual 
‘organ-inferiority’ or the subjective feeling of it - one does not know which - is really capable of serving as 
the foundation of Adler’s system. I will merely remark in passing that if it were so neurosis would appear as 
a by-product of every kind of physical decrepitude, whereas observation shows that an impressive majority 
of ugly, misshapen, crippled and miserable people fail to react to their defects by neurosis. Nor will I deal 
with the interesting assertion according to which inferiority is to be traced back to the feeling of being a 
child. It shows the disguise under which the factor of infantilism, which is so strongly emphasized by 
psycho-analysis, re-appears in ‘Individual Psychology’. On the other hand, I must point out how all the 
psychological acquisitions of psycho-analysis have been thrown to the winds by Adler. In his book Uber den 
nervosen Charaktertbe unconscious is still mentioned as a psychological peculiarity, without, however, any 
relation to his system. Later, he has consistently declared that it is a matter of indifference to him whether 
an idea is conscious or unconscious. Adler has never from the first shown any understanding of repression. 
In an abstract of a paper read by him at the Vienna Society (February, 1911) he wrote that it must be 
pointed out that the evidence in a particular case showed that the patient had never repressed his libido, 
but had been continually ‘safeguarding’ himself against it. Soon afterwards, in a discussion at the Vienna 
Society, he said: ‘If you ask where repression comes from, you are told, "from civilization"; but if you go on 
to ask where civilization comes from, you are told "from repression". So you see it is all simply playing with 
words.' A tithe of the acuteness and ingenuity with which Adler has unmasked the defensive devices of the 
‘nervous character’ would have been enough to show him the way out of this pettifogging argument. What 
is meant is simply that civilization is based on the repressions effected by former generations, and that 
each fresh generation is required to maintain this civilization by effecting the same repressions. I once 
heard of a child who thought people were laughing at him, and began to cry, because when he asked 
where eggs come from he was told ‘from hens’, and when he went on to ask where hens come from he was 
told ‘from eggs’. But they were not playing with words; on the contrary, they were telling him the truth. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2920 


Everything that Adler has to say about dreams, the shibboleth of psycho-analysis, is equally empty and 
unmeaning. At first he regarded dreams as a turning away from the feminine to the masculine line - which is 
simply a translation of the wish-fulfilment theory of dreams into the language of the ‘masculine protest’. 

Later he found that the essence of dreams lies in enabling men to accomplish unconsciously what they are 
denied consciously. Adler must also be credited with priority in confusing dreams with latent dream- 
thoughts - a confusion on which the discovery of his ‘prospective tendency’ rests. Maeder followed his lead 
in this later. Here the fact is readily overlooked that every interpretation of a dream which is 
incomprehensible in its manifest form is based on the very method of dream-interpretation whose 
premisses and conclusions are being disputed. In regard to resistance Adler informs us that it serves the 
purpose of putting into effect the patient’s opposition to the physician. This is certainly true; it is as much as 
to say that it serves the purpose of resistance. Where it comes from, however, or how it happens that its 
phenomena are at the disposal of the patient is not further enquired into, as being of no interest to the ego. 
The detailed mechanism of the symptoms and manifestations of diseases, the explanation of the manifold 
variety of those diseases and their forms of expression, are disregarded in toto\ for everything alike is 
pressed into the service of the masculine protest, self-assertion and the aggrandizement of the personality, 
the system is complete; to produce it has cost an enormous amount of labour in the recasting of 
interpretations, while it has not furnished a single new observation. I fancy I have made it clear that it has 
nothing to do with psycho-analysis. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2921 

The view of life which is reflected in the Adlerian system is founded exclusively on the aggressive instinct; 
there is no room in it for love. We might feel surprise that such a cheerless Weltanschauung should have 
met with any attention at all; but we must not forget that human beings, weighed down by the burden of 
their sexual needs, are ready to accept anything if only the ‘overcoming of sexuality’ is offered them as a 
bait. 

Adler’s secession took place before the Weimar Congress in 1911; after that date the Swiss began theirs. 
The first signs of it, curiously enough, were a few remarks of Riklin’s in some popular articles appearing in 
Swiss publications, so that the general public learned earlier than those most intimately concerned in the 
subject that psycho-analysis had got the better of some regrettable errors which had previously discredited 
it. In 1912 Jung boasted, in a letter from America, that his modifications of psycho-analysis had overcome 
the resistances of many people who had hitherto refused to have anything to do with it. I replied that that 
was nothing to boast of, and that the more he sacrificed of the hard-won truths of psycho-analysis the more 
would he see resistances vanishing. This modification which the Swiss were so proud of introducing was 
again nothing else but a pushing into the background of the sexual factor in psycho-analytic theory. I 
confess that from the beginning I regarded this ‘advance’ as too far-reaching an adjustment to the demands 
of actuality. 

These two retrograde movements away from psycho-analysis, which I must now compare with each 
other, show another point in common: for they both court a favourable opinion by putting forward certain 
lofty ideas, which view things, as it were, sub specie aeternitatis. With Adler, this part is played by the 
relativity of all knowledge and the right of the personality to put an artificial construction on the data of 
knowledge according to individual taste; with Jung, the appeal is made to the historic right of youth to throw 
off the fetters in which tyrannical age with its hidebound views seeks to bind it. A few words must be 
devoted to exposing the fallacy of these ideas. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2922 


The relativity of our knowledge is a consideration which may be advanced against every other science 
just as well as against psycho-analysis. It is derived from familiar reactionary currents of present-day feeling 
which are hostile to science, and it lays claim to an appearance of superiority to which no one is entitled. 
None of us can guess what the ultimate judgement of mankind about our theoretical efforts will be. There 
are instances in which rejection by the first three generations has been corrected by the succeeding one 
and changed into recognition. After a man has listened carefully to the voice of criticism in himself and has 
paid some attention to the criticisms of his opponents, there is nothing for him to do but with all his strength 
to maintain his own convictions which are based of experience. One should be content to conduct one’s 
case honestly, and should not assume the office of judge, which is reserved for the remote future. The 
stress on arbitrary personal views in scientific matters is bad; it is clearly an attempt to dispute the right of 
psycho-analysis to be valued as a science - after that value, incidentally, has already been depreciated by 
what has been said before. Anyone who sets a high value on scientific thought will rather seek every 
possible means and method of circumscribing the factor of fanciful personal predilections as far as possible 
wherever it still plays too great a part. Moreover, it is opportune to recall that any zeal in defending 
ourselves is out of place. These arguments of Adler’s are not intended seriously. They are only meant for 
use against his opponents; they do not touch his own theories. Nor have they prevented his followers from 
hailing him as the Messiah, for whose appearance expectant humanity has been prepared by a number of 
forerunners. The Messiah is certainly no relative phenomenon. 

Jung’s argument ad captandam benevolentiam 1 rests on the too optimistic assumption that the progress 
of the human race, of civilization and knowledge, has always pursued an unbroken one; as if there had 
been no periods of decadence, no reactions and restorations after every revolution, no generations who 
have taken a backward step and abandoned the gains of their predecessors. His approach to the 
standpoint of the masses, his abandonment of an innovation which proved unwelcome, make it a priori 
improbable that Jung’s corrected version of psycho-analysis can justly claim to be a youthful act of 
liberation. After all, it is not the age of the doer that decides this but the character of the deed. 


1 ['For the purpose of gaining good-will.’] 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2923 


Of the two movements under discussion Adler's is indubitably the more important; while radically false, it 
is marked by consistency and coherence. It is, moreover, in spite of everything, founded upon a theory of 
the instincts. Jung’s modification, on the other hand, loosens the connection of the phenomena with 
instinctual life; and further, as its critics (e.g. Abraham, Ferenczi and Jones) have pointed out, it is so 
obscure, unintelligible and confused as to make it difficult to take up any position upon it. Wherever one 
lays hold of anything, one must be prepared to hear that one has misunderstood it, and one cannot see 
how to arrive at a correct understanding of it. It is put forward in a peculiarly vacillating manner, one 
moment as ‘quite a mild deviation, which does not justify the outcry that has been raised about it’ (Jung), 
and the next moment as a new message of salvation which is to begin a new epoch for psycho-analysis, 
and, indeed, a new Weltanschauung for everyone. 

When one thinks of the inconsistencies displayed in the various public and private pronouncements made 
by the Jungian movement, one is bound to ask oneself how much of this is due to lack of clearness and 
how much to lack of sincerity. It must be admitted, however, that the exponents of the new theory find 
themselves in a difficult position. They are now disputing things which they themselves formerly upheld, 
and they are doing so, moreover, not on the ground of fresh observations which might have taught them 
something further, but in consequence of fresh interpretations which make the things they see look different 
to them now from what they did before. For this reason they are unwilling to give up their connection with 
psycho-analysis, as whose representatives they became known to the world, and prefer to give it out that 
psycho-analysis has changed. At the Munich Congress I found it necessary to clear up this confusion, and I 
did so by declaring that I did not recognize the innovations of the Swiss as legitimate continuations and 
further developments of the psycho-analysis that originated with me. Outside critics (like Furtmuller) had 
already seen how things were, and Abraham is right in saying that Jung is in full retreat from psycho- 
analysis. I am of course perfectly ready to allow that everyone has a right to think and to write what he 
pleases; but he has no right to put it forward as something other than what it really is. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2924 


Just as Adler’s investigation brought something new to psycho-analysis - a contribution to the psychology 
of the ego - and then expected us to pay too high a price for this gift by throwing over all the fundamental 
theories of analysis, so in the same way Jung and his followers paved the way for their fight against 
psycho-analysis by presenting it with a new acquisition. They traced in detail (as Pfister did before them) 
the way in which the material of sexual ideas belonging to the family-complex and incestuous object-choice 
is made use of in representing the highest ethical and religious interests of man - that is, they have 
illuminated an important instance of the sublimation of the erotic instinctual forces and of their 
transformation into trends which can no longer be called erotic. This was in complete harmony with all the 
expectations of psycho-analysis, and would have agreed very well with the view that in dreams and 
neurosis a regressive dissolution of this sublimation, as of all others, becomes visible. But the world would 
have risen in indignation and protested that ethics and religion were being sexualized. Now I cannot refrain 
from thinking teleologically for once and concluding that these discoverers were not equal to meeting such 
a storm of indignation. Perhaps it even began to rage in their own bosoms. The theological prehistory of so 
many of the Swiss throws no less light on their attitude to psycho-analysis than does Adler’s socialist 
prehistory on the development of his psychology. One is reminded of Mark Twain’s famous story of all the 
things that happened to his watch and of his concluding words: ‘And he used to wonder what became of all 
the unsuccessful tinkers, and gunsmiths, and shoemakers, and blacksmiths; but nobody could ever tell 
him.’ 

Suppose - to make use of a simile - that in a particular social group there lives a parvenu, who boasts of 
being descended from a noble family living in another place. It is pointed out to him, however, that his 
parents live somewhere in the neighbourhood, and that they are quite humble people. There is only one 
way of escape from his difficulty and he seizes on it. He can no longer repudiate his parents, but he asserts 
that they themselves are of noble lineage and have merely come down in the world; and he procures a 
family-tree from some obliging official source. It seems to me that the Swiss have been obliged to behave in 
much the same way. If ethics and religion were not allowed to be sexualized but had to be something 
‘higher’ from the start, and if nevertheless the ideas contained in them seemed undeniably to be descended 
from the Oedipus and family-complex, there could be only one way out: it must be that from the very first 
these complexes themselves do not mean what they seem to be expressing, but bear the higher ‘anagogic’ 
meaning (as Silberer calls it) which made it possible for them to be employed in the abstract trains of 
thought of ethics and religious mysticism. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2925 

I am quite prepared to be told again that I have misunderstood the substance and purpose of the Neo- 
Zurich theory; but I must protest in advance against any contradictions to my view of it that may be found in 
the publications of that school being laid at my door instead of theirs. I can find no other way of making the 
whole range of Jung’s innovations intelligible to myself and of grasping all their implications. All the changes 
that Jung has proposed to make in psycho-analysis flow from his intention to eliminate what is 
objectionable in the family-complexes, so as not to find it again in religion and ethics. For sexual libido an 
abstract concept has been substituted, of which one may safely say that it remains mystifying and 
incomprehensible to wise men and fools alike. The Oedipus complex has a merely ‘symbolic’ meaning: the 
mother in it means the unattainable, which must be renounced in the interests of civilization; the father who 
is killed in the Oedipus myth is the ‘inner’ father, from whom one must set oneself free in order to become 
independent. Other parts of the material of sexual ideas will no doubt be subjected to similar re- 
interpretations in the course of time. In the place of a conflict between ego-dystonic erotic trends and the 
self-preservative ones a conflict appears between the ‘life-task’ and ‘psychical inertia’; the neurotic’s sense 
of guilt corresponds to his self-reproach for not properly fulfilling his ‘life-task’. In this way a new religio- 
ethical system has been created, which, just like the Adlerian system, was bound to re-interpret, distort or 
jettison the factual findings of analysis. The truth is that these people have picked out a few cultural 
overtones from the symphony of life and have once more failed to hear the mighty and primordial melody of 
the instincts. 

In order to preserve this system intact it was necessary to turn entirely away from observation and from 
the technique of psycho-analysis. Occasionally enthusiasm for the cause even permitted a disregard of 
scientific logic - as when Jung finds that the Oedipus complex is not ‘specific’ enough for the aetiology of 
the neuroses, and proceeds to attribute this specific quality to inertia, the most universal characteristic of all 
matter, animate and inanimate! It is to be noted, by the way, that the ‘Oedipus complex’ represents only a 
topic with which the individual’s mental forces have to deal, and is not itself a force, like ‘psychical inertia’. 
The study of individual people had shown (and always will show) that the sexual complexes in their original 
sense are alive in them. On that account the investigation of individuals was pushed into the background 
and replaced by conclusions based on evidence derived from anthropological research. The greatest risk of 
coming up against the original, undisguised meaning of these re-interpreted complexes was to be met with 
in the early childhood of every individual; consequently in therapy the injunction was laid down that this past 
history should be dwelt on as little as possible and the main emphasis put on reverting to the current 
conflict, in which, moreover, the essential thing was on no account to be what was accidental and personal, 
but what was general - in fact, the non-fulfilment of the life-task. As we know, however, a neurotic’s current 
conflict becomes comprehensible and admits of solution only when it is traced back to his prehistory, when 
one goes back along the path that his libido took when he fell ill. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 


2926 


The form taken by the Neo-Zurich therapy under these influences can be conveyed in the words of a 
patient who experienced it himself: This time not a trace of attention was given to the past or to the 
transference. Wherever I thought I recognized the latter it was pronounced to be a pure libidinal symbol. 

The moral instruction was very fine and I followed it faithfully, but I did not advance a step. It was even 
more annoying for me than for him, but how could I help it? . . . Instead of freeing me by analysis, every day 
brought fresh tremendous demands on me, which had to be fulfilled if the neurosis was to be conquered - 
for instance, inward concentration by means of introversion, religious meditation, resuming life with my wife 
in loving devotion, etc. It was almost beyond one’s strength; it was aiming at a radical transformation of 
one’s whole inner nature. I left the analysis as a poor sinner with intense feelings of contrition and the best 
resolutions, but at the same time in utter discouragement. Any clergyman would have advised what he 
recommended, but where was I to find the strength?’ The patient, it is true, reported that he had heard that 
analysis of the past and of the transference must be gone through first; but he had been told that he had 
already had enough of it. Since this first kind of analysis had not helped him more, the conclusion seems to 
me justified that the patient had not had enough of it. Certainly the subsequent treatment, which no longer 
had any claim to be called psycho-analysis, did not improve matters. It is remarkable that the members of 
the Zurich school should have made the long journey round by way of Vienna in order to wind up at the 
nearby city of Berne, where Dubois cures neuroses by ethical encouragement in a more considerate 
manner . 1 

The total incompatibility of this new movement with psycho-analysis shows itself too, of course, in Jung’s 
treatment of repression, which is hardly mentioned nowadays in his writings, in his misunderstanding of 
dreams, which, like Adler, in complete disregard of dream-psychology, he confuses with the latent dream- 
thoughts, and in his loss of all understanding of the unconscious - in short, in all the points which I should 
regard as the essence of psycho-analysis. When Jung tells us that the incest-complex is merely ‘symbolic’, 
that after all it has no ‘real’ existence, that after all a savage feels no desire towards an old hag but prefers 
a young and pretty woman, we are tempted to conclude that ‘symbolic’ and ‘without real existence' simply 
mean something which, in virtue of its manifestations and pathogenic effects, is described by psycho- 
analysis as ‘existing unconsciously’ - a description that disposes of the apparent contradiction. 

1 1 know the objections there are to making use of a patient's reports, and I will therefore expressly state that my 
informant is a trustworthy person, very well capable of forming a judgement. He gave me this information quite 
spontaneously and I make use of his communication without asking his consent, since I cannot allow that a psycho- 
analytic technique has any right to claim the protection of medical discretion. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2927 

If one bears in mind that dreams are something different from the latent dream-thoughts which they work 
over, there is nothing surprising in patients dreaming of things with which their minds have been filled 
during the treatment, whether it be the ‘life-task’, or ‘being on top’ or ‘underneath’. The dreams of people 
being analysed can undoubtedly be directed, in the same way as they are by stimuli produced for 
experimental purposes. One can determine a part of the material which appears in a dream; nothing in the 
essence or mechanism of dreams is altered by this. Nor do I believe that ‘biographical’ dreams, as they are 
called, occur outside analysis. If, on the other hand, one analyses dreams which occurred before treatment, 
or if one considers the dreamer’s own additions to what has been suggested to him in the treatment, or if 
one avoids setting him any such tasks, then one may convince oneself how far removed it is from the 
purpose of a dream to produce attempted solutions of the life-task. Dreams are only a form of thinking; one 
can never reach an understanding of this form by reference to the content of the thoughts; only an 
appreciation of the dream-work will lead to that understanding. 

It is not difficult to find a factual refutation of Jung’s misconceptions of psycho-analysis and deviations 
from it. Every analysis conducted in a proper manner, and in particular every analysis of a child, 
strengthens the convictions upon which the theory of psycho-analysis is founded, and rebuts the re- 
interpretations made by both Jung’s and Adler’s systems. In the days before his illumination, Jung himself 
carried out and published an analysis of this kind of a child; it remains to be seen whether he will undertake 
a new interpretation of its results with the help of a different ‘one-sided arrangement of the facts’, to use the 
expression employed by Adler in this connection. 

The view that the sexual representation of ‘higher’ thoughts in dreams and neurosis is nothing but an 
archaic mode of expression is of course irreconcilable with the fact that in neurosis these sexual complexes 
prove to be the bearers of the quantities of libido which have been withdrawn from utilization in real life. If it 
was merely a question of a sexual ‘jargon’, the economy of the libido could not have been altered in any 
way by it. Jung admits this himself in his Darstellung der psychoanatytischen Theorie and formulates the 
task of therapy as the detaching of libidinal cathexes from these complexes. This can never be achieved, 
however, by directing the patient away from them and urging him to sublimate, but only by exhaustive 
examination of them and by making them fully and completely conscious. The first piece of reality which the 
patient must deal with is his illness. Efforts to spare him that task point to the physician’s incapacity to help 
him to overcome his resistances, or else to the physician’s dread of the results of the work. 



On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement 

2928 

It may be said lastly that by his ‘modification’ of psycho-analysis Jung has given us a counterpart to the 
famous Lichtenberg knife. He has changed the hilt, and he has put a new blade into it; yet because the 
same name is engraved on it we are expected to regard the instrument as the original one. 

I think I have made clear, on the contrary, that the new teaching which aims at replacing psycho-analysis 
signifies an abandonment of analysis and a secession from it. Some people may be inclined to fear that this 
secession is bound to have more momentous consequences for analysis than would another, owing to its 
having been started by men who have played so great a part in the movement and have done so much to 
advance it. I do not share this apprehension. 

Men are strong so long as they represent a strong idea; they become powerless when they oppose it. 
Psycho-analysis will survive this loss and gain new adherents in place of these. In conclusion, I can only 
express a wish that fortune may grant an agreeable upward journey to all those who have found their stay 
in the underworld of psycho-analysis too uncomfortable for their taste. The rest of us, I hope, will be 
permitted without hindrance to carry through to their conclusion our labours in the depths. 


February , 1914. 



