Beyond the 

Pleasure Principle 



Sigmund Freud 



W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, 

New York, N.Y. 101 10 

W. W. Norton & Company Ltd. 37 Great Russell Street, 

London WC1B 3NU 

COPYRIGHT © 1961 BY JAMES STRACHBY 

Reprinted by arrangement with Liveright Publishing Corporation 

Introduction Copyright © 1959 by Bantam Books. 
Reprinted by permission of the publisher. 

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 

Published simultaneously in Canada by 
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 

2801 John Street, Markham, Ontario L3R 1B4. 

W. W. Nortor & Company, Inc. is also the publisher of the 
works of Erik H. Erikson, Otto Fenichel, Karen Homey, Harry Stack 
Sullivan, and The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological 
Works of Sigmund Freud. 

library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 

Freud, Sigmund, 1856-1939 
Beyond the pleasure principle. 

Translation of Jenseits des Lust-Prinzips. 

Reprint of the ed. published by Liveright, New York. 
Bibliography: p. 

Includes index. 

1. Pleasure. 2. Psychoanalysis. I. Title. 

BF173.F65 1975 I50.19'52 74-22476 

Printed in the United States of America 

6 7 8 9 0 


ISBN Q-3T3-00?bT-3 



» 


CONTENTS 

Introduction vii 

Editor’s Note xvii 

Beyond the Pleasure Principle ~ 1 

List of Abbreviations 59 

Bibliography and Author Index 60 

General Index 64 


» 




INTRODUCTION 

by Gregory Zilboorg, M.D. 


A question which seems natural and almost unavoidable 
arises: What can one say about a book, and a little one at 
that, which is forty years old, and which is supposedly not one 
of the most impressive or “spectacular” bits of Freud’s many 
writings? The question presupposes the implied answer that 
forty years even in our swift-moving world is a long time, that 
the book in question is therefore more or less superannuated 
and deserves but a respectful historical glance before we put 
it back on the shelf to gather more dust. 

It is obvious that the above is a rhetorical way of saying 
that forty years after its appearance and twenty years after 
Freud’s death. Beyond the Pleasure Principle still deserves 
considerable attention, and that the reader would do well if 
he reads it with studious curiosity. Of recent years we have 
become so accustomed to the atmosphere of controversy 
which surrounds psychoanalysis and Freud that we have al- 
most lost our capacity to pick up a book on psychoanalysis 
without wanting to know in advance whether the book is for 
or against it, or, if it is for it, whether it is for Freud or for 
Jung, or, if it is Freudian, whether it is orthodox or neo- 
Freudian. If we dared to be frank with ourselves, we would 
have no difficulty in admitting that our judgment of psycho- 
analysis is actually fragmentary and not too profound. We 
could also admit that some sort of partisanship possesses us, 
and that therefore we are preoccupied with “taking sides” 
long before we get acquainted with the very first elements of 
psychoanalysis and the many-sidedness of the subject. 

It is because of the various prejudices which have incul- 
cated themselves into psychoanalytical and nonpsychoanalyti- 
cal circles that it is pertinent to invite both the initiated and 
the uninitiated reader to suspend his fragmentary judgment 



viii 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


for a short while and re-read afresh the little book that is 
here offered, and acquaint or re-acquaint himself with the 
sound of Freud’s written voice, with his way of saying things, 
and then with the substance of what he has to say. 

An introduction is not supposed to explain in advance 
what is said in the book; still less is it meant to interpret it. 
Rather, it is intended to clarify some shadows and point to 
certain lights which will possibly set the book in a proper 
perspective. 

Bearing this in mind, let us first recall that Freud wrote 
Beyond the Pleasure Principle when he was sixty-four years 
old— a mature age indeed— and at a time when psychoanalysis 
had already achieved considerable popularity, even though it 
was still possible to assess the degree of its importance by the 
number of enemies it had. The tone of the book, the manner- 
isms of its style are vigorous, poignant, almost controversial; 
Freud it seems was still combatting his opponents rather than 
trying to instruct his proponents. Almost to the last years of 
his life, Freud preserved this combative vigor of writing, and 
in Beyond the Pleasure Principle this aspect of style stands 
out markedly, particularly when he emphasizes his claim that 
he is a partisan of no special philosophy and that he is indif- 
ferent as to whether what he has to say does or does not fit any 
known philosophy. 

This claim for independence is characteristic of Freud’s 
personality and of all his writings, but I believe it in no way 
casts aspersion on his originality or his genius, if I say that 
this declaratory independence should not be taken too seri- 
ously. No one, and particularly no genius, is really free of the 
ideological inheritance which he carries within himself as a 
child of a given generation. He may not be aware of it, of 
course, but Freud would have been the last man in the world 
to equate not being aware of something with its nonexistence. 
For it was of course Freud himself who discovered and un- 
folded before us the staggering richness and power within us 
of so many things of which we are not aware. 

It is of some interest in this connection to recall that Freud 
denied ever having been acquainted with the writings of 
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche before he formulated many of 
his ideas. It was beyond any doubt an honest denial. Yet it is 
a matter of record that Hitschmann, one of the earliest ad- 



INTRODUCTION 


ix 


herents of Freud, read a paper in Freud’s house as early as 
1905 (Freud being present, of course) on the very subject of 
Nietzsche’s ideas as compared with some of Freud’s theories. 
There is no doubt that, whether or not Freud ever read 
Nietzsche’s The Genealogy of Morals , his was the tempera- 
ment and the aspiration of a proud iconoclast who, to para- 
phrase an old saying of Maxim Gorki’s, was born to soar and 
not to crawl, and for whom soaring accomplishment was not 
a pleasure in itself but a temporary level from which he 
strove to attain ever-greater heights. 

If we cast but a glance at the rough sketch of a general 
psychology which we find in Freud’s letters to Fliess, we 
cannot help but be struck by the depth, diapason and im- 
mense horizons which Freud envisaged as the culmination 
of his system. And these letters, we must remember, were 
written before 1900, that is to say, before the first book {The 
Interpretation of Dreams) which really launched psycho- 
analysis into the stormy waters of a world which never was 
able to approach the study of the psychology of man without 
prejudice and considerable animosity and controversy— be it 
religious, scientific, or plain pedestrian. The ambition with 
which Freud’s mind was fired from the very outset, and his 
particular goal of discovering, or uncovering, the real nature 
of man’s mind, predestined him as a thinker and a man to 
become a storm center for years to come. 

He was also a daring paradox, giving the semblance of 
self-contradiction, of inconsistency, and of all-solidity. Freud’s 
apparent readiness to change his mind added a great number 
of dissenters and detractors— as if the scientist who has the 
courage to change his mind about some of his own ideas has . 
gained a point against himself. The great majority of people 
do confuse stubbornness for consistency, and rigidity of sci- 
entific ideas for soundness of position. 

At any rate. Beyond the Pleasure Principle is one of the 
first great landmarks in Freud’s ways of “changing his mind.” 

I put these words in quotes to cast at least a little doubt on 
the traditional attitude that Freud did change his mind in 
this instance. He did not. What Freud did here was to add a 
path or two, a little curve or fork, in the tortuous intellectual 
road which he followed with dogged faith in his own intellec- 
tual independence. The additions or added trends of thought 



X 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


cannot be fully grasped and even less understood unless one 
always bears in mind the inner psychological atmosphere in 
which Freud worked in order to express his ideas. 

His literary style was always terse, straightforward, clear 
and challengingly frank; but the same thing cannot be said 
about the emotional climate of his thought. First of all, 
Freud never gave up his belief— I am tempted to say faith— 
that the parallel he drew between Fechner’s ideas in physics 
and his own in human psychology was not really a parallel 
but an actual proof that his concept of the mental apparatus 
and its energy was actually the same as Helmholtz' and 
Fechner’s ideas about physical energy. To this faith he clung 
to the last, expressing the hope that some day the whole com- 
plexity of human reactions and relations could be reduced 
to some as yet undiscovered physico-chemical reactions. In 
other words, Freud remained an organicist throughout his 
scientific life. But genius and living paradox that he was, 
Freud was rejected by the materialists (conservative as well 
as Marxian) because of his alleged mysticism; and he was 
rejected by the idealists and religious thinkers because he was 
thought to be a materialist. 

The contradictions into which Freud’s detractors thus 
stumbled remained unnoticed as a rule, but Freud was of 
course aware of them and saw in them merely a sign of gen- 
eral resistance. Yet it was not only that. To Freud the epithet, 
“mystic,” was an expression of opprobrium, and yet it was 
Freud who stated that saints were saved from severe neuroses 
by their sainthood, their faith; he mentioned in this connec- 
tion St. Francis of Assisi. He who studies the lives of the saints 
would not easily issue to all of them, and without reservation, 
a certificate of psychological health. They were saints because 
they were able to stand the pressure of their respective neu- 
roses rather than because they did not suffer from them. The 
lives of St. Ignatius Loyola, or San Francisco Xavier, or St. 
Augustine for that matter, offer ample confirmation of my 
viewpoint. 

As one studies Freud, one can develop the strong suspicion 
that he was more attracted by many mystics than by physico- 
chemical hypotheses, and that he struggled with all the might 
of his great mind against openly giving in to the attraction 
of the mystical aspects of human life. In other words, the man 



INTRODUCTION 


xi 


who less than twenty years after he wrote Beyond the Pleasure 
Principle wrote his Moses and Monotheism, the man who 
some five years before Beyond the Pleasure Principle wrote 
the article on Michelangelo’s Moses , seems throughout this 
span of time to have been preoccupied with the greatness of 
human intuitions and the universality of human strivings not 
only to solve but to participate in the mysteries of life. And 
it is perhaps because of this inclination that Freud gave signs 
of ‘'protesting too much.” (Perhaps too this is one of the 
reasons why his article on Michelangelo’s Moses appeared 
first anonymously; it was only much later that it was admitted 
that Freud, the Editor-in-chief of the Zeitschrift fur Psycho- 
analyse, was the real author of the article.) 

While the complex question of Freud’s intellectual strug- 
gles with his own ideas is far from solved, there is little doubt 
that the aggressive, trenchant, emphatic tone of his writings, 
which seem to be full of conviction and devoid of doubt, does 
not fully convey Freud’s struggle with his own ideas, which 
at times must have reached heroic dimensions. It is because 
of Freud’s aggressive candor, it seems to me, that his earliest 
followers seem more to have stood in awe, listening to his 
pronouncements, than actually to have assimilated his 
thought like true disciples, ready to ask friendly critical 
questions in order to deepen and broaden the understanding 
of their master’s thought. The very few of his followers who 
were endowed with truly original minds and truly ambitious 
perspicacity and intuition soon broke with Freud; Jung is 
one of the few one can cite in this respect. The majority be- 
came either surly, hostile enemies— rather than scientific op- 
ponents— or admiring, enthusiastic followers— rather than 
scientific collaborators. 

It is therefore of particular interest to note that there was 
hardly a psychoanalyst outside Freud himself who ever made 
an original contribution to the theory and practice of psycho- 
analysis; this is particularly true of the time when Freud 
wrote his Beyond the Pleasure Principle. The one exception 
one can cite with certainty was Karl Abraham, who made an 
inestimable contribution to the clinical understanding of 
character formation and of depression, a contribution which 
was spontaneously and “painlessly” incorporated into the 
body of psychoanalytic knowledge some five years before the 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


* 4 

XU 

appearance of Beyond the Pleasure Principle. But even in 
the case of Abraham things were not all clarity and sunshine; 
many of his colleagues were not very kindly disposed to the 
man, and Freud himself, as Jones has written, said that he 
was suspicious of his ‘'Prussian mind*'— Abraham being a 
Berliner. 

All of the above amounts to saying that the constant and 
“true” followers of Freud were not very original minds; they 
were not mediocrities, but for some reason they would not 
or perhaps could not “speak up” until Freud spoke first. It 
is partly because of this that Beyond the Pleasure Principle 
acquired such significance in the history of the development 
of Freudian psychoanalysis. It acquired the reputation of a 
landmark in how Freud changed his mind and how daring 
he was in doing so. As a matter of cold fact, the book is an 
important contribution, a thrust forward in the growth of 
Freudian thought; but if one reads it carefully one will easily 
see that Freud did not change his mind, and that Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle did not overthrow any old psychoanalytic 
regime nor did it establish any new one. It was not even a 
small village revolution; it was and is a landmark of further 
development and a consolidation of the older pathways. 
Beyond the Pleasure Principle is what it says; it goes a little 
further beyond, but it does not abandon whatever preceded it. 

This writer lays no claim to an understanding of Freud's 
writing better than anyone’s else who approaches Freud with 
the earnestness he deserves and the tolerance which is im- 
perative, even now some twenty years after Freud's death. I 
say “even now” for the following reason; at the beginning 
Freud had to suffer from the many whose quick and ever 
alert misjudgment of him multiplied by thousands the num- 
ber of his antagonists in every walk of the world’s intellectual 
life. Today, with the full text of Freud at the disposal of 
every curious reader of the world, everybody claims Freud as 
his own, because everybody just as alertly is ready to interpret 
Freud in his own ivay. Thus a plethora of “schools” has mush- 
roomed in the psychological literature, each claiming its 
philosophical, moral and scientific right to consider Freud its 
fons et origOj and its own exclusive right to understand Freud 
in its own exclusively correct way. This splintering of inter- 
preters and misinterpreters of Freud is not unnatural, of 



INTRODUCTION 


xiii 

course; the process will undoubtedly continue for some time 
before the real Freud will stand out in the history of our 
intellectual development as a figure at whom and into whom 
we may look calmly and objectively. 

Since it is not in anyone’s power to slow down or to accel- 
erate the salutary passage of time, it cannot be the ambition 
of this writer to attempt to do so. But this much it is legiti- 
mate for him to essay to do: to point out that the vigor of 
Freud’s thought, stimulating as it has always been and is, is 
frequently obscured by his at times too hasty terminological 
innovations. Not that one objects to such innovations, or that 
one ought to insist on semantic hair-splitting; but Freud, 
whose clarity of thought and daring intellectual improvisa- 
tions were always impressive and enlightening, suffered not 
infrequently from a certain confusion, at first unnoticeable 
but at length presenting an impediment to easy or clear 
understanding. Beyond the Pleasure Principle serves as an 
excellent example. 

First, there is the tendency which imperceptibly grew into 
assertive tradition that, having gone beyond the pleasure 
principle, he abandoned that principle. This, as I have al- 
ready said, is not true. The reader, bearing this in mind, can- 
not fail but see it once the text is perused without prejudice, 
without the unwitting psychological twist which makes him 
read Beyond the Pleasure Principle and assume that the 
pleasure principle was left behind. We might as well state 
right here that the assiduous and faithful translators of Freud, 
in bringing before the English-speaking readers Freud’s ver- 
sion of the pleasure-pain theory, did not help matters when 
they coined a neologism, “unpleasure. ’’ This awkward term 
is supposed to render somewhat accurately the German term 
Unlust. It is not an exactly successful rendition (except 
etymologically, perhaps). The feeling of pain, of discomfort, 
of that disagreeable malaise which Freud has in mind is not 
perceived as un-pleasure, for what we feel in this malaise we 
feel positively, and not negatively as a lack of something else. 
This point need not be labored; it is brought out here merely 
to illustrate how difficult it is to tell the reader what a given 
writer wants to say in a language his own, but not yours. 

Now let us ask ourselves what appears to be new and not 
allegedly abandoned as old in Beyond the Pleasure Principle. 



XIV 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


The concept of “compulsive repetition” or “repetition 
compulsion.” Some still quarrel with this concept, some no 
longer do. The arguments for and against it are of no par- 
ticular importance here. What is important is that new con- 
cepts, newly formulated, require greater clarity of definition. 
Freud discovered the repetitiveness of certain patterns of 
human behavior and the inevitability or, if you wish, the 
inescapable nature of this repetitiveness. And he called this 
phenomenon “repetition compulsion” or “compulsive repe- 
tition.” 

We have become accustomed to the term “compulsion” 
when we speak of compulsion neuroses— in other words, a 
neurosis which makes the sufferer therefrom aware that he 
is “compelled by something” to make this or that gesture or 
this or that turn or else he feels uncomfortable, uneasy, at 
times plainly anxious. It is hardly necessary to go into more 
detail to observe that the compulsive element of which Freud 
speaks when he speaks of compulsive repetition is something 
that the individual is not conscious of, that the compulsive 
element in this concept is something which is not neurotic 
at all, or not necessarily, and that it is just as or no more 
compulsive than breathing or the changing of the seasons. To 
use the term “compulsive” here connotes something that it is 
not and implies things which are not necessarily there— a 
rather strange semantic fuzziness on the part of that uniquely 
clear-minded thinker. Such unclarities are strewn throughout 
many of Freud’s writings and translations, and if they do not 
always confuse the casual reader or even the student, one 
would do well in being forewarned and therefore in reading 
and studying Freud with considerable caution and prudence. 

One more example: the second major innovation which 
Freud introduced into psychoanalytic thinking was the con- 
cept of the death instinct . Now we have become accustomed, 
particularly since Freud emphasized the role of instincts in 
the conscious and unconscious life of man, to consider an 
instinct a drive, an impulsive or perpetually compelling as- 
piration to gratify a need . In German, Freud uses the words 
Trieb and Triebhaft , which mean instinct, instinctual drive, 
a sense of being driven toward a certain even though not 
always comprehended goal. Under the circumstances, the 
term death instinct” ought to mean an aspiration, a drive to 



INTRODUCTION 


xv 


be dead. Perhaps Freud was right, even though neither the 
biologist nor the theologian would find it possible to agree 
with him. Let us assume that Freud was right; he certainly 
did not prove his case, because there is nothing instinctual 
about dying, even though the end is inevitable. Here again 
we find a strange semantic or terminological confusion, a 
tendency to use terms which are familiar to us in the psycho- 
analytic glossaries, but which in certain contexts become 
somewhat confusing labels. 

The above considerations may serve as a warning that it is 
not easy to understand great minds even when they appear 
to speak simply, or perhaps especially when their language 
appears simple and the terminology familiar. 




EDITOR’S NOTE 

JENSEITS DES LUSTPRINZIPS 

(a) German Editions: 

1920 Leipzig, Vienna and Zurich: Intemationaler Psycho 

analytischer Verlag. Pp. 60. 

1921 2nd ed. Same publishers. Pp. 64. 

1923 3rd ed. Same publishers. Pp* 94. 

1925 G.S . , 6, 191-257. 

1931 Theoretische Schriften, 178-247. 

1940 G.W., 13,3-69. 

(b) English Translations: 

Beyond the Pleasure Principle 

1922 London and Vienna: International Psycho-Analytical 

Press. Pp. viii 4- 90. (Tr. G. J. M. Hubback; Pref. 
Ernest Jones.) 

1924 New York: Boni and Liveright. 

1942 London: Hogarth Press and Institute of Psycho-Analy- 
sis. (Re-issue of above.) 

1950 Same Publishers. Pp. vi + 97. (Tr. J. Strachey.) 

1955 S.E., 18, 3-64. (Modified version of above.) 

Freud made a number of additions in the second edition, but 
subsequent alterations were negligible. The present translation 
is a corrected reprint of the Standard Edition version. 

As is shown by his correspondence, Freud had begun working 
on a first draft of Beyond the Pleasure Principle in March, 1919, 
and he reported the draft as finished in the following May. 
During the same month he was completing his paper on ‘The 
Uncanny’ (1919A), which includes a paragraph setting out 
much of the gist of the present work in a few sentences. In this 
paragraph he refers to the ‘compulsion to repeat’ as a pheno- 
menon exhibited in the behaviour of children and in psycho- 
analytic treatment; he suggests that this compulsion is some- 
thing derived from the most intimate nature of the instincts; 
and he declares that it is powerful enough to disregard the 

xvii 



xviii BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

pleasure principle. There is, however, no allusion to the ‘death 
instincts*. He adds that he has already completed a detailed 
exposition of the subject. The paper on ‘The Uncanny* con- 
taining this summary was published in the autumn of 1919. 
But Freud held back Beyond the Pleasure Principle for another 
year. In the early part of 1920 he was once more at work on it, 
and now, for the first time apparently, there is a reference to 
the ‘death instincts’ in a letter to Eitingon of February 20. He 
was still revising the work in May and June and it was finally 
completed by the middle of July, 1920. On September 9, he gave 
an address to the International Psycho-Analytical Congress 
at The Hague, with the title ‘Supplements to the Theory of 
Dreams’ ( Ergdnzungen zur Traumlekre ), in which he announced 
the approaching publication of the book; it was issued early in 
December. An ‘author’s abstract’ of the address appeared in 
Int Z- Psychoanal. , 6 (1920), 397-8. (A translation of this was pub- 
lished in Int J . Psycho- Anal ., 1, 354.) It does not seem certain 
that this abstract was in fact by Freud himself, but it may be of 
interest to reprint it here (in a new translation). 

‘ Supplements to the Theory of Dreams' 

‘The speaker dealt in his brief remarks with three points 
touching upon the theory of dreams. The first two of these were 
concerned with the thesis that dreams are wish-fulfilments and 
brought forward some necessary modifications of it. The third 
point related to material which brought complete confirmation 
of his rejection of the alleged “prospective” purposes of dreams. 1 

‘The speaker explained that, alongside the familiar wishful 
dreams and the anxiety dreams which could easily be included 
in the theory, there were grounds for recognizing the existence 
of a third category, to which he gave the name of “punishment 
dreams”. If we took into account the justifiable assumption of 
the existence of a special self-observing and critical agency in 
the ego (the ego ideal, the censor, conscience), these punish- 
ment dreams, too, should be subsumed under the theory of 
wish-fulfilment; for they would represent the fulfilment of a 
wish on the part of this critical agency. Such dreams, he said, 
had approximately the same relation to ordinary wishful dreams 

1 [See The Interpretation of Dreams , 1900<i, VI (I), Standard Ed.. 5, 
506-7 «.] 



EDITOR’S NOTE 


xix 


as the symptoms of obsessional neurosis, which arise from re- 
action formation, had to those of hysteria. 

‘Another class of dreams, however, seemed to the speaker to 
present a more serious exception to the rule that dreams are 
wish-fulfilments. These were the so-called “traumatic” dreams. 
They occur in patients suffering from accidents, but they also 
occur during psycho-analyses of neurotics and bring back to 
them forgotten traumas of childhood. In connection with the 
problem of fitting these dreams into the theory of wish-fulfil- 
ment, the speaker referred to a work shortly to be published 
under the title of Beyond the Pleasure Principle . 

‘The third point of the speaker’s communication related to 
an investigation that had not yet been published, by Dr. Varen- 
donck of Ghent. This author had succeeded in bringing under 
his conscious observation the production of unconscious phan- 
tasies on an extensive scale in a half-sleeping state — a process 
which he described as “autistic thinking”. It appeared from 
this enquiry that looking ahead at the possibilities of the next 
day, preparing attempts at solutions and adaptations, etc., lay 
wholly within the range of this preconscious activity, which 
also created latent dream-thoughts, and, as the speaker had 
always maintained, had nothing to do with the dream-work.* 1 


In the series of Freud’s metapsychological writings, Beyond 
the Pleasure Principle may be regarded as introducing the final 
phase of his views. He had already drawn attention to the 
‘compulsion to repeat’ as a clinical phenomenon, but here he 
attributes to it the characteristics of an instinct; here too for the 
first time he brings forward the new dichotomy between Eros 
and the death instincts which found its full elaboration in The 
Ego and the Id (1923£). In Beyond the Pleasure Principle , too, we 
can see signs of the new picture of the anatomical structure of 
the mind which was to dominate all Freud’s later writings. 
Finally, the problem of destructiveness, which played an ever 
more prominent part in his theoretical works, makes its first 
explicit appearance. The derivation of various elements in the 
present discussion from his earlier metapsychological works — 
such as ‘The Two Principles of Mental Functioning’ (191 1^), 

1 Cf. Freud’s own preface to this book of Varendonck’s (Freud, 
1921A, Standard Ed., 18, 271). 



XX 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


‘Narcissism* (1914*:) and ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes* 
(191 5^) — will be obvious. But what is particularly remarkable 
is the closeness with which some of the earlier sections of the 
present work follow the ‘Project for a Scientific Psychology’ 
(1950#), drafted by Freud twenty-five years earlier, in 1895. 

Extracts from the earlier ( 1 922) translation of this work were 
included in Rickman’s General Selection from the Works of Sigmund 
Freud (1937, 162-194). 

Editorial additions, whether to the text or the footnotes, are 
printed in square brackets. 



Beyond the Pleasure Principle 




BEYOND THE PLEASURE 
PRINCIPLE 


In the theory of psycho-analysis we have no hesitation in assum- 
ing that the course taken by mental events is automatically 
regulated by the pleasure principle. We believe, that is to say, 
that the course of those events is invariably set in motion by an 
unpleasurable tension, and that it takes a direction such that 
its final outcome coincides with a lowering of that tension — that 
is, with an avoidance of unpleasure or a production of pleasure. 
In taking that course into account in our consideration of the 
mental processes which are the subject of our study, we are 
introducing an ‘economic’ point of view into our work; and if, 
in describing those processes, we try to estimate this ‘economic’ 
factor in addition to the ‘topographical’ and ‘dynamic’ ones, 
we shall, I think, be giving the most complete description of 
them of which we can at present conceive, and one which 
deserves to be distinguished by the term ‘metapsychologxcal ’. 1 

It is of no concern to us in this connection to enquire how 
far, with this hypothesis of the pleasure principle, we have 
approached or adopted any particular, historically established, 
philosophical system. We have arrived at these speculative 
assumptions in an attempt to describe and to account for the 
facts of daily observation in our field of study. Priority and 
originality are not among the aims that psycho-analytic work 
sets itself; and the impressions that underlie the hypothesis of 
the pleasure principle are so obvious that they can scarcely be 
overlooked. On the other hand we would readily express our 
gratitude to any philosophical or psychological theory which 
was able to inform us of the meaning of the feelings of pleasure 
and unpleasure which act so imperatively upon us. But on this 
point we are, alas, offered nothing to our purpose. This is the 
most obscure and inaccessible region of the mind, and, since 
we cannot avoid contact with it, the least rigid hypothesis, it 
seems to me, will be the best. We have decided to relate 


i [See Section IV of ‘The Unconscious’ (1915*).] 

1 



2 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

pleasure and unpleasure to the quantity of excitation that is 
present in the mind but is not in any way ‘bound’; 1 and to 
relate them in such a manner that unpleasure corresponds to 
an increase in the quantity of excitation and pleasure to a 
diminution . What we are implying by this is not a simple relation 
between the strength of the feelings pleasure and unpleasure 
and the corresponding modifications in the quantity of excita- 
tion; least of all — in view of all we have been taught by psycho- 
physiology — are we suggesting any directly proportional ratio: 
the factor that determines the feeling is probably the amount of 
increase or diminution in the quantity of excitation in a given 
period of time. Experiment might possibly play a part here; but 
it is not advisable for us analysts to go into the problem 
further so long as our way is not pointed by quite definite 
observations. 1 

We cannot, however, remain indifferent to the discovery that 
an investigator of such penetration as G. *T. Fechner held a view 
on the subject of pleasure and unpleasure which coincides in 
all essentials with the one that has been forced upon us by 
psycho-analytic work. Fechner’s statement is to be found con- 
tained in a small work, Einige Idem zur Sckopjungs- und Entwick - 
lungsgesckichte der Organismcn y 1873 (Part XI, Supplement, 94), 
and reads as follows: ‘In so far as conscious impulses always 
have some relation to pleasure or unpleasure, pleasure and 
unpleasure too can be regarded as having a psycho-physical 
relation to conditions of stability and instability. This provides a 
basis for a hypothesis into which I propose to enter in greater 
detail elsewhere. According to this hypothesis, every psycho- 
physical motion rising above the threshold of consciousness is 
attended by pleasure in proportion as, beyond a certain limit, 
it approximates to complete stability, and as attended by un- 
pleasure in proportion as, beyond a certain limit, it deviates 
from complete stability; while between the two limits, which 
may be described as qualitative thresholds of pleasure and 

1 (The concepts of ‘quantity’ and of ‘bound* excitation, which run 
through the whole of Freud’s writings, found what is perhaps their most 
detailed discussion in the early ‘Project* (1950a [1895]). See in par- 
ticular the long discussion of the term ‘bound’ near the end of Section 1 
of Part III of that work. See also p. 28 f. below.] 

* [This point is again mentioned below on p. 57 and further de- 
veloped in ‘The Economic Problem of Masochism* (1924c).] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


3 


unpleasure, there is a certain margin of aesthetic indiffer- 
ence. . . .* 1 

The facts which have caused us to believe in the dominance 
of the pleasure principle in mental life also find expression in 
the hypothesis that the mental apparatus endeavours to keep 
the quantity of excitation present in it as low as possible or at 
least to keep it constant. This latter hypothesis is only another 
way of stating the pleasure principle; for if the work of the 
mental apparatus is directed towards keeping the quantity of 
excitation low, then anything that is calculated to increase that 
quantity is bound to be felt as adverse to the functioning of the 
apparatus, that is as unpleasurable. The pleasure principle 
follows from the principle of constancy: actually the latter 
principle was inferred from the facts which forced us to adopt 
the pleasure principle.* Moreover, a more detailed discussion 
will show that the tendency which we thus attribute to the 
mental apparatus is subsumed as a special case under Fechner’s 
principle of the ‘tendency towards stability*, to which he has 
brought the feelings of pleasure and unpleasure into relation. 

It must be pointed out, however, that strictly speaking it is 
incorrect to talk of the dominance of the pleasure principle over 
the course of mental processes. If such a dominance existed, 
the immense majority of our mental processes would have to be 
accompanied by pleasure or to lead to pleasure, whereas 
universal experience completely contradicts any such con- 
clusion. The most that can be said, therefore, is that there exists 
in the mind a strong tendency towards the pleasure principle, but 
that that tendency is opposed by certain other forces or circum- 
stances, so that the final outcome cannot always be in harmony 

1 [Cf. ‘Project’, end of Section 8 of Part I, — ‘Aesthetic* is here used in' 
the old sense of ‘relating to sensation or perception*.] 

* [The ‘principle of constancy* dates back to the very beginning of 
Freud’s psychological studies. The first published discussion of it of any 
length was by Breuer (in semi-physiological terms) towards the end of 
Section 2(A) of his theoretical part of the Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and 
Freud, 1895). He there defines it as ‘the tendency to keep intracerebral 
excitation constant*. In the same passage he attributes this principle to 
Freud and there in fact exist one or two earlier very brief references to 
it by Freud himself, though these were not published until after his 
death. (See Freud, 1941a [1892] and Breuer and Freud, 1940 [1892].) 
The subject is also discussed at length at the beginning of Freud’s 
‘Project’, under the name of ‘neuronic inertia*.] 



4 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

with the tendency towards pleasure. We may compare what 
Fechner (1873, 90) remarks on a similar point: ‘Since however a 
tendency towards an aim does not imply that the aim is attained, 
and since in general the aim is attainable only by approxima- 
tions. . . 

If we turn now to the question of what circumstances are able 
to prevent the pleasure principle from being carried into effect, 
we find ourselves once more on secure and well-trodden ground 
and, in framing our answer, we have at our disposal a rich fund 
of analytic experience. 

The first example of the pleasure principle being inhibited 
in this way is a familiar one which occurs with regularity. We 
know that the pleasure principle is proper to a primary method 
of working on die part of the mental apparatus, but that, from 
the point of view of the self-preservation of the organism among 
the difficulties of the external world, it is from the very outset 
inefficient and even highly dangerous. Under the influence of 
the ego’s instincts of self-preservation, the pleasure principle is 
replaced by the reality principle. 1 This latter principle does not 
abandon the intention of ultimately obtaining pleasure, but it 
nevertheless demands and carries into effect the postponement 
of satisfaction, the abandonment of a number of possibilities of 
gaining satisfaction and the temporary toleration of unpleasure 
as a step on the long indirect road to pleasure. The pleasure 
principle long persists, however, as the method of working em- 
ployed by the sexual instincts, which are so hard to ‘educate*, 
and, starting from those instincts, or in the ego itself, it often 
succeeds in overcoming the reality principle, to the detriment of 
the organism as a whole. 

There can be no doubt, however, that the replacement of the 
pleasure principle by the reality principle can only be made 
responsible for a small number, and by no means the most 
intense, of unpleasurable experiences. Another occasion of the 
release of unpleasure, which occurs with no less regularity, is 
to be found in the conflicts and dissensions that take place in the 
mental apparatus while the ego is passing through its develop- 
ment into more highly composite organizations. Almost all the 
energy with which the apparatus is filled arises from its innate 
instinctual impulses. But these are not all allowed to reach 

1 [See ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of Mental F unctionincr’ , 
Freud 191 U.] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 5 

the same phases of development. In the course of things it 
happens again and again that individual instincts or parts of 
instincts turn out to be incompatible in their aims or demands 
with the remaining ones, which are able to combine into the 
inclusive unity of the ego. The former are then split off from 
this unity by the process of repression, held back at lower levels 
of psychical development and cut off, to begin with, from the 
possibility of satisfaction. If they succeed subsequently, as can 
so easily happen with repressed sexual instincts, in struggling 
through, by roundabout paths, to a direct or to a substitutive 
satisfaction, that event, which would in other cases have been an 
opportunity for pleasure, is felt by the ego as unpleasure. As 
a consequence of the old conflict which ended in repression, a 
new breach has occurred in the pleasure principle at the very 
time when certain instincts were endeavouring, in accordance 
with the principle, to obtain fresh pleasure. The details of the 
process by which repression turns a possibility of pleasure into a 
source of unpleasure are not yet clearly understood or cannot 
be clearly represented; but there is no doubt that all neurotic 
unpleasure is of that kind — pleasure that cannot be felt as such . 1 

The two sources of unpleasure which I have just indicated 
are very far from covering the majority of our unpleasurable 
experiences. But as regards the remainder it can be asserted with 
some show of justification that their presence does not contradict 
the dominance of the pleasure principle. Most of the unpleasure 
that we experience is perceptual unpleasure. It may be perception 
of pressure by unsatisfied instincts; or it may be external percep- 
tion which is either distressing in itself or which excites un- 
pleasurable expectations in the mental apparatus — that is, 
which is recognized by it as a ‘danger*. The reaction to these 
instinctual demands and threats of danger, a reaction which 
constitutes the proper activity of the mental apparatus, can 
then be directed in a correct manner by the pleasure principle 
or the reality principle by which the former is modified. This 
does not seem to necessitate any far-reaching limitation of the 
pleasure principle. Nevertheless the investigation of the mental 
reaction to external danger is precisely in a position to pro- 
duce new material and raise fresh questions bearing upon our 
present problem. 

1 [Footnote added 1925:] No doubt the essential point is that pleasure 
and unpleasure, being conscious feelings, are attached to the ego. 



II 


A condition has long been known and described which occurs 
after severe mechanical concussions, railway disasters and other 
accidents involving a risk to life; it has been given the name of 
‘traumatic neurosis*. The terrible war which has just ended gave 
rise to a great number of illnesses of this kind, but it at least put 
an end to the temptation to attribute the cause of the disorder 
to organic lesions of the nervous system brought about by 
mechanical force . 1 The symptomatic picture presented by 
traumatic neurosis approaches that of hysteria in the wealth of 
its similar motor symptoms, but surpasses it as a rule in its 
strongly marked signs of subjective ailment (in which it re- 
sembles hypochondria or melancholia) as well as in the evidence 
it gives of a far more comprehensive general enfeeblement and 
disturbance of the mental capacities. No complete explanation 
has yet been reached either of war neuroses or of the traumatic 
neuroses of peace. In the case of the war neuroses, the fact that 
the same symptoms sometimes came about without the inter- 
vention of any gross mechanical force seemed at once enlight- 
ening and bewildering. In the case of the ordinary traumatic 
neuroses two characteristics emerge prominently: first, that 
the chief weight in their causation seems to rest upon the 
factor of surprise, of fright; and secondly, that a wound or injury 
inflicted simultaneously works as a rule against the development 
of a neurosis. ‘Fright*, ‘fear* and ‘anxiety ’ 2 * * * 6 are improperly used 
as synonymous expressions; they are in fact capable of clear dis- 
tinction in their relation to danger. ‘Anxiety’ describes a par- 
ticular state of expecting the danger or preparing for it, even 
though it may be an unknown one. ‘Fear* requires a definite 
object of which to be afraid. ‘Fright’, however, is the name we 
give to the state a person gets into when he has run into danger 
without being prepared for it; it emphasizes the factor of sur- 
prise. I do not believe anxiety can produce a traumatic neuro- 

1 Cf. the discussion on the psycho-analysis of war neuroses by Freud, 

Fcrcnczi, Abraham, Simmel and Jones (1919) [to which Freud pro- 

vided the introduction (1919<i). See also his posthumously published 

‘Report on the Electrical Treatment of War Neuroses* (1955* [1920]).] 

1 [In German, ‘ Schreck *, ‘FurchV and 'Angst'.] 

6 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


7 


sis. There is something about anxiety that protects its subject 
against fright and so against fright-neuroses. We shall return 
to this point later [p. 25 f.]. 1 

The study of dreams may be considered the most trustworthy 
method of investigati ng deep mental processes. Now dreams 
occurring in traumatic neuroses have the characteristic of 
repeatedly bringing the patient back into the situation of his 
accident, a situation from which he wakes up in another fright. 
This astonishes people far too little. They think the fact that 
the traumatic experience is constantly forcing itself upon the 
patient even in his sleep is a proof of the strength of that experi- 
ence: the patient is, as one might say, fixated to his trauma. 
Fixations to the experience which started the illness have long 
been familiar to us in hysteria. Breuer and Freud declared in 
1893 s that ‘hysterics suffer mainly from reminiscences’. In the 
war neuroses, too, observers like Ferenczi and Simmel have 
been able to explain certain motor symptoms by fixation to the 
moment at which the trauma occurred. 

I am not aware, however, that patients suffering from trau- 
matic neurosis are much occupied in their waking lives with 
memories of their accident. Perhaps they are more concerned 
with not thinking of it. Anyone who accepts it as something self 1 
evident that their dreams should put them back at night into 
the situation that caused them to fall ill has misunderstood the 
nature of dreams. It would be more in harmony with their 
nature if they showed the patient pictures from his healthy past 
or of the cure for which he hopes. If we are not to be shaken in 
our belief in the wish-fulfilling tenor of dreams by the dreams 
of traumatic neurotics, we still have one resource open to us: 
we may argue that the function of dreaming, like so much eke, 
is upset in this condition and diverted from its purposes, or we 

1 [Freud is very far indeed from always carrying out the distinc- 
tion he makes here. More often than not he uses the word * Angst* to 
denote a state of fear without any reference to the future. It seems not 
unlikely that in this passage he is beginning to adumbrate the distinction 
drawn in Inhibitions , Symptoms and Anxiety (19266?) between anxiety as a 
reaction to a traumatic situation — probably equivalent to what is here 
called Sckreck — and anxiety as a warning signal of the approach of such 
an event. See also his use of the phrase ‘preparedness for anxiety’ on 
p. 25.] 

* [‘On the Psychical Mechanism of Hysterical Phenomena*, end of 
Section I.] 



8 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


may be driven to reflect on the myst erious masochi stic t reads 
oTtiie egoT 1 ~ "" 

At this point I propose to leave the dark and dismal subject 
of the traumatic neurosis and pass on to examine the method 
of working employed by the mental apparatus in one of its 
earliest normal activities — I mean in children’s play. 

The different theories of children’s play have only recently 
been summarized and discussed from the psycho-analytic point 
of view by Pfeifer (1919), to whose paper I would refer my 
readers. These theories attempt to discover the motives which 
lead children to play, but they fail to bring into the foreground 
the economic motive, the consideration of the yield of pleasure 
involved. Without wishing to include the whole field covered 
by these phenomena, I have been able, through a chance op- 
portunity which presented itself, to throw some light upon the 
first game played by a little boy of one and a half and invented 
by himself. It was more than a mere fleeting observation, for I 
lived under the same roof as the child and his parents for some 
weeks, and it was some time before I discovered the meaning 
of the puzzling activity which he constantly repeated. 

The child was not at all precocious in his intellectual de- 
velopment. At the age of one and a half he could say only a few 
comprehensible words; he could also make use of a number of 
sounds which expressed a meaning intelligible to those around 
him. He was, however, on good terms with his parents and their 
one servant-girl, and tributes were paid to his being a ‘good 
boy’. He did not disturb his parents at night, he conscientiously 
obeyed orders not to touch certain things or go into certain 
rooms, and above all he never cried when his mother left him 
for a few hours. At the same time, he was greatly attached to 
his mother, who had not only fed him herself but had also 
looked after him without any outside help. This good little boy, 
however, had an occasional disturbing habit of taking any small 
objects he could get hold of and throwing them away from him 
into a comer, under the bed, and so on, so that hunting for his 
toys and picking them up was often quite a business. As he did 
this he gave vent to a loud, long-drawn-out c o-o-o-o’, accom- 
panied by an expression of interest and satisfaction. His mother 

1 [The last 15 words of this sentence were added in 1921. For all thi* 
see The Interpretation of Dream (1900a ) Standard Ed., 5, 550 ff.] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


9 


and the writer of the present account were agreed in thinking 
that this was not a mere inteijection but represented the Ger- 
man word fort' [‘gone’]. I eventually realized that it was a 
game and that the only use he made of any of his toys was to 
play ‘gone* with them. One day I made an observation which 
confirmed my view. The child had a wooden reel with a piece 
of string tied round it. It never occurred to him to pull it along 
the floor behind him, for instance, and play at its being a car- 
riage. What he did was to hold the reel by the string and very 
skilfully throw it over the edge of his curtained cot, so that it 
disappeared into it, at the same time uttering his expressive 
‘o-o-o-o*. He then pulled the reel out of the cot again by the 
string and hailed its reappearance with a joyful 6 da' [‘there*]. 
This, then, was the complete game — disappearance and return. 
As a rule one only witnessed its first act, which was repeated 
untiringly as a game in itself, though there is no doubt that the 
greater pleasure was attached to the second act . 1 

The interpretation of the game then became obvious. It 
was related to the child’s great cultural achievement — the in- 
stinctual renunciation (that is, the renunciation of instinctual 
satisfaction) which he had made in allowing his mother to go 
away without protesting. He compensated himself for this, as it 
were, by himself staging the disappearance and return of the 
objects within his reach. It is of course a matter of indifference 
from the point of view of judging the effective nature of the 
game whether the child invented it himself or took it over on 
some outside suggestion. Our interest is directed to another 
point. The child cannot possibly have felt his mother’s depart- 
ure as something agreeable or even indifferent. How then does 
his repetition of this distressing experience as a game fit in with 
the pleasure principle? It may perhaps be said in reply that her 
departure had to be enacted as a necessary preliminary to her joy- 
ful return, and that it was in the latter that lay the true purpose 

1 A further observation subsequently confirmed this interpretation 
fully. One day the child’s mother had been away for several hours and 
on her return was met with the words ‘Baby o-o-o-o!* which was at first 
incomprehensible. It soon turned out, however, that during this long 
period of solitude the child had found a method of making himself dis- 
appear. He had discovered his reflection in a full-length mirror which 
did not quite reach to the ground, so that by crouching down he could 
make his mirror-image ‘gone*. [A further reference to this story will be 
found in The Interpretation of Dreams , Standard Ed. } 5, 461n.] 



10 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

of the game. But against this must be counted the observed 
fact that the first act, that of departure, was staged as a game 
in itself and far more frequently than the episode in its entirety, 
with its pleasurable ending. 

No certain decision can be reached from the analysis of a 
single case like this. On an unprejudiced view one gets an im- 
pression that the child turned his experience into a game from 
another motive. At the outset he was in a passive situation — he 
was overpowered by the experience; but, by repeating it, 
unpleasurable though it was, as a game, he took on an active 
part. These efforts might be put down to an instinct for mastery 
that was acting independently of whether the memory was 
in itself pleasurable or not. But still another interpretation may 
be attempted. Throwing away the object so that it was ‘gone’ 
might satisfy an impulse of the child’s, which was suppressed in 
his actual life, to revenge himself on his mother for going away 
from him. In that case it would have a defiant meaning: ‘All 
right, then, go away! I don’t need you. Fhn sending you away 
myself.’ A year later, the same boy whom I had observed at his 
first game used to take a toy, if he was angry with it, and throw 
it on the floor, exclaiming: ‘Go to the fwont!’ He had heard at 
that time that his absent father was ‘at the front’, and was far 
from regretting his absence; on the contrary he made it quite 
clear that he had no desire to be disturbed in his sole possession 
of his mother . 1 * * * * We know of other children who liked to express 
similar hostile impulses by throwing away objects instead of 
persons . 8 We are therefore left in doubt as to whether the 
impulse to work over in the mind some overpowering experi- 
ence so as to make oneself master of it can find expression as a 
primary event, and independently of the pleasure principle. 
For, in the case we have been discussing, the child may, after 
all, only have been able to repeat his unpleasant experience in 
play because the repetition carried along with it a yield of 
pleasure of another sort but none the less a direct one. 

Nor shall we be helped in our hesitation between these two 
views by further considering children’s play. It is clear that in 

1 When this child was five and three-quarters, his mother died. Now 

that she was really ‘gone’ ( < o-o-o > ), the little boy showed no signs of 

grief. It is true that in the interval a second child had been bom and had 

roused him to violent jealousy. 

1 Cf. my note on a childhood memory of Goethe’s (1917£). 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


11 


their play children repeat everything that has made a great 
impression on them in real life, and that in doing so they 
abreact the strength of the impression and, as one might put 
it, make themselves master of the situation. But on the other 
hand it is obvious that all their play is influenced by a wish 
that dominates them the whole time — the wish to be grown-up 
and to be able to do what grown-up people do. It can also be 
observed that the unpleasurable nature of an experience does 
not always unsuit it for play. If the doctor looks down a child’s 
throat or carries out some small operation on him, we may be 
quite sure that these frightening experiences will be the subject 
of the next game; but we must not in that connection overlook 
the fact that there is a yield of pleasure from another source. 
As the child passes over from the passivity of the experience to 
the activity of the game, he hands on the disagreeable experi- 
ence to one of his playmates and in this way revenges himself 
on a substitute. 

Nevertheless, it emerges from this discussion' that there is no 
need to assume the existence of a special imitative instinct in 
order to provide a motive for play. Finally, a reminder may be 
added that the artistic play and artistic imitation carried out 
by adults, which, unlike children’s, are aimed at an audience, 
do not spare the spectators (for instance, in tragedy) the most 
painful experiences and can yet be felt by them as highly enjoy- 
able . 1 This is convincing proof that, even under the dominance 
of the pleasure principle, there are ways and means enough of 
making what is in itself unpleasurable into a subject to be 
recollected and worked over ih the mind. The consideration of 
these cases and situations, which have a yield of pleasure as 
their final outcome, should be undertaken by some system of 
aesthetics with an economic approach to its subject-matter. 
They are of no use for our purposes, since they presuppose the 
existence and dominance of the pleasure principle; they give 
no evidence of the operation of tendencies beyond the pleasure 
principle, that is, of tendencies more primitive than it and in- 
dependent of it. 

i [Freud had made a tentative study of this point in his posthumously 
published paper on ‘Psychopathic Characters on the Stage’ (1942a) 
which was probably written in 1905 or 1906.] 



Twenty-five years of intense work have had as their result 
that the immediate aims of psycho-analytic technique are quite 
other to-day than they were at the outset. At first the analysing 
physician could do no more than discover the unconscious 
material that was concealed from the patient, put it together, 
and, at the right moment, communicate it to him. Psycho- 
analysis was then first and foremost an art of interpreting. 
Since this did not solve the therapeutic problem, a further aim 
quickly came in view: to oblige the patient to confirm the 
analyst’s construction from his own memory. In that endeavour 
the chief emphasis lay upon the patient’s resistances: the art 
consisted now in uncovering these as quickly as possible, in 
pointing them out to the patient and in inducing him by human 
influence — this was where suggestion operating as ‘transference’ 
played its part — to abandon his resistances. 

But it became ever clearer that the aim which had been set 
up — the aim that what was unconscious should become con- 
scious — is not completely attainable by that method. The 
patient cannot remember the whole of what is repressed in him, 
and what he cannot remember may be precisely the essential 
part of it. Thus he acquires no sense of conviction of the cor- 
rectness of the construction that has been communicated to 
him. He is obliged to repeat the repressed material as a con- 
temporary experience instead of, as the physician would prefer 
to see, remembering it as something belonging to the past . 1 These 
reproductions, which emerge with such unwished-for exacti- 
tude, always have as their subject some portion of infantile 
sexual life — of the Oedipus complex, that is, and its derivatives; 
and they are invariably acted cut in the sphere of the trans- 
ference, of the patient’s relation to the physician. When things 
have reached this stage, it may be said that the earlier neurosis 
has now been replaced by a fresh, ‘transference neurosis’. It has 

1 See my paper on ‘Recollecting, Repeating and Working Through* 
(1914g). [An early reference will be found in this same paper to the 
‘compulsion to repeat’, which is one of the principle topics discussed in 
the present work. (See also the Editor’s Note above, p. xi.) — The term 
‘transference neurosis’ in the special sense in which it is used a few lines 
lower down also appears in that paper.] 

12 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 13 

been the physician’s endeavour to keep this transference neuro- 
sis within the narrowest limits: to force as much as possible into 
the channel of memory and to allow as little as possible to 
emerge as repetition. The ratio between what is remembered 
and what is reproduced varies from case to case. The physician 
cannot as a rule spare his patient this phase of the treatment. 
He must get him to re-experience some portion of his forgotten 
life, but must see to it, on the other hand, that the patient 
retains some degree of aloofness, which will enable him, in spite 
of everything, to recognize that what appears to be reality is in 
fact only a reflection of a forgotten past. If this can be success- 
fully achieved, the patient’s sense of conviction is won, together 
with the therapeutic success that is dependent on it. 

In order to make it easier to understand this ‘compulsion to 
repeat’, which emerges during the psycho-analytic treatment 
of neurotics, we must above all get rid of the mistaken notion 
that what we are dealing with in our struggle against resistances 
is resistance on the part of the unconscious . The unconscious — 
that is to say, the ‘repressed’ — offers no resistance whatever to 
the efforts of the treatment. Indeed, it itself has no other en- 
deavour than to break through the pressure weighing down on 
it and force its way either to consciousness or to a discharge 
through some real action. Resistance during treatment arises 
from the same higher strata and systems of the mind which 
originally carried out repression. But the fact that, as we know 
from experience, the motives of the resistances, and indeed the 
resistances themselves, are unconscious at first -during the treat- 
ment, is a hint to us that we should correct a shortcoming in 
our terminology. We shall avoid a lack of clarity if we make 
our contrast not between the conscious and the unconscious but 
between the coherent ego 1 and the repressed . It is certain that 
much of the ego is itself unconscious, and notably what we may 
describe as its nucleus ; 2 only a small part of it is covered by the 
term ‘preconscious ’. 3 Having replaced a purely descriptive 

1 [Cf. a discussion of this in the Editor’s Introduction to The Ego and 
the Id (19236), Standard Ed ., 19, 7-8; I.P.L., 12, xiii-xiv.] 

2 [This is corrected in a footnote at the beginning of Chapter III of 
The Ego and the Id, ibid., 28, and ibid., 16.] 

3 [In its present form this sentence dates from 192 1 . In the first edition 
(1920) it ran: ‘It may be that much of the ego is itself unconscious; only 
a part of it, probably, is covered by the term “preconscious”.*] 



14 beyond the pleasure principle 

terminology by one which is systematic or dynamic, we can say 
that the patient’s resistance arises from his ego, 1 and we then 
at once perceive that the compulsion to repeat must be ascribed 
to the unconscious repressed. It seems probable that the com- 
pulsion can only express itself after the work of treatment has 
gone half-way to meet it and has loosened the repression. 2 

There is no doubt that the resistance of the conscious and 
unconscious ego operates under the sway of the pleasure prin- 
ciple: it seeks to avoid the unpleasure which would be produced 
by the liberation of the repressed. Our efforts, on the other hand, 
are directed towards procuring the toleration of that unpleasure 
by an appeal to the reality principle. But how is the compulsion 
to repeat — the manifestation of the power of the repressed — 
related to the pleasure principle? It is clear that the greater part 
of what is re-experienced under the compulsion to repeat must 
cause the ego unpleasure, since it brings to light activities of 
repressed instinctual impulses. That, however, is unpleasure of 
a kind we have already considered and does not contradict the 
pleasure principle : unpleasure for one system and simultaneously 
satisfaction for the other. 3 But we come now to a new and re- 
markable fact, namely that the compulsion to repeat also recalls 
from the past experiences which include no possibility of 
pleasure, and which can never, even long ago, have brought 
satisfaction even to instinctual impulses which have since been 
repressed. ' 

The early efflorescence of infantile sexual life is doomed to 
extinction because its wishes are incompatible with reality and 
with the inadequate stage of development which the child has 
reached. That efflorescence comes to an end in the most dis- 
tressing circumstances and to the accompaniment of the most 
painful feelings. Loss of love and failure leave behind them a 
permanent injury to self-regard in the form of a narcissistic 
scar, which in my opinion, as well as in Marcinowski’s (1918), 
contributes more than anything to the ‘sense of inferiority’ 

1 [A fuller and somewhat different account of the sources of resistance 
will be found in Chap. XI of Inhibitions , Symptoms and Anxiety (1926^).] 

* [Footnote added 1923:] I have argued elsewhere [1923c] that what 
thus comes to the help of the compulsion to repeat is the factor of 
‘suggestion’ in the treatment — that js, the patient’s submissiveness to the 
physician, which has its roots deep m his unconscious parental complex. 

* [Gf. Freud’s allegorical use of the fairy tale of the ‘Three Wishes’ 
at the beginning of Lecture XIV of his Introductory Lectures (1916-17).] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 15 

which is so common in neurotics. The child’s sexual researches, 
on which limits are imposed by his physical development, lead 
to no satisfactory conclusion; hence such later complaints as 
*1 can’t accomplish anything; I can’t succeed in anything*. The 
tie of affection, which binds the child as a rule to the parent of 
the opposite sex, succumbs to disappointment, to a vain ex- 
pectation of satisfaction or to jealousy over the birth of a new 
baby — unmistakable proof of the infidelity of the object of the 
child’s affections. His own attempt to make a baby himself, 
carried out with tragic seriousness, fails shamefully. The les- 
sening amount of affection he receives, the increasing demands 
of education, hard words and an occasional punishment — these 
show him at last the full extent to which he has been scorned. 
These are a few typical and constantly recurring instances of 
the ways in which the love characteristic of the age of child- 
hood is brought to a conclusion. 

Patients repeat all of these unwanted situations and painful 
emotions in the transference and revive them with the greatest 
ingenuity. They seek to bring about the interruption of the 
treatment while it is still incomplete; they contrive once more 
to feel themselves , scorned, to oblige the physician to speak 
severely to them and treat them coldly; they discover appro- 
priate objects for their jealousy; instead of the passionately 
desired baby of their childhood, they produce a plan or a 
promise of some grand present — which turns out as a rule to be 
no less unreal. None of these things can have produced pleasure 
in the past, and it might be supposed that they would cause less 
unpleasure to-day if they emerged as memories or dreams 
instead of taking the form of fresh experiences. They are of 
course the activities of instincts intended to lead to satisfaction; 
but no lesson has been learnt from the old experience of these 
activities having led instead only to unpleasure. 1 In spite of that, 
they are repeated, under pressure of a compulsion. 

What psycho-analysis reveals in the transference phenomena 
of neurotics can also be observed in the lives of some normal 
people. The impression they give is of being pursued by a malig- 
nant fate or possessed by some ‘daemonic’ power; but psycho- 
analysis has always taken the view that their fate is for the most 
part arranged by themselves and determined by early infantile 
influences. The compulsion which is here in evidence differs in 

1 [This sentence was added in 1921.] 



16 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

no way from the compulsion to repeat which we have found in 
neurotics, even though the people we are now considering have 
never shown any signs of dealing with a neurotic conflict by 
producing symptoms. Thus we have come across people ail of 
whose human relationships have the same outcome: such as the 
benefactor who is abandoned in anger after a time by each of 
his protigiSy however much they may otherwise differ from one 
another, and who thus seems doomed to taste all the bitterness 
of ingratitude; or the man whose friendships all end in betrayal 
by his friend; or the man who time after time in the course of 
his life raises someone else into a position of great private or 
public authority and then, after a certain interval, himself up- 
sets that authority and replaces him by a new one; or, again, 
the lover each of whose love affairs with a woman passes 
through the same phases and reaches the same conclusion. This 
‘perpetual recurrence of the same thing* causes us no astonish- 
ment when it relates to active behaviour on the part of the person 
concerned and when we can discern in him an essential char- 
acter-trait which always remains the same and which is com- 
pelled to find expression in a repetition of the same experiences. 
We are much more impressed by cases where the subject 
appears to have a passive experience, over which he has no 
influence, but in which he meets with a repetition of the same 
fatality. There is the case, for instance, of the woman who 
married three successive husbands each of whom fell ill soon 
afterwards and had to be nursed by her on their death-beds. 1 
The most moving poetic picture of a fate such as this is given by 
Tasso in his romantic epic Gerusalemme Liberata. Its hero, 
Tancred, unwittingly kills his beloved Clorinda in a duel while 
she is disguised in the armour of an enemy knight. After her 
burial he makes his way into a strange magic forest which 
strikes the Crusaders’ army with terror. He slashes with his 
sword at a tall tree; but blood streams from the cut and the 
voice of Clorinda, whose soul is imprisoned in the tree, is heard 
complaining that he has wounded his beloved once again. 

If we take into account observations such as these, based 
upon behaviour in the transference and upon the life-histories 
of men and women, we shall find courage to assume that there 
really does exist in the mind a compulsion to repeat which over- 
rides the pleasure principle. Now too we shall be inclined to 
1 Gf. the apt remarks on this subject by C. G. Jung (1909). 



17 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

relate to this compulsion the dreams which occur in traumatic 
neuroses and the impulse which leads children to play. 

But it is to be noted that only in rare instances can we observe 
the pure effects of the compulsion to repeat, unsupported by 
other motives. In the case of children’s play we have already 
laid stress on the other ways in which the emergence of the 
compulsion may be interpreted; the compulsion to repeat and 
instinctual satisfaction which is immediately pleasurable seem 
to converge here into an intimate partnership. The phenomena 
of transference are obviously exploited by the resistance which 
the ego maintains in its pertinacious insistence upon repression; 
the compulsion to repeat, which the treatment tries to bring 
into its service is, as it were, drawn over by the ego to its side 
(clinging as the ego does to the pleasure principle ). 1 A great deal 
of what might be described as the compulsion of destiny seems 
intelligible on a rational basis; so that we are under no neces- 
sity to call in a new and mysterious motive force to explain it. 

The least dubious instance [of such a motive force] is perhaps 
that of traumatic dreams. But on maturer reflection we shall 
be forced to admit that even in the other instances the whole 
ground is not covered by the operation of the familiar motive 
forces. Enough is left unexplained to justify the hypothesis of a 
compulsion to repeat — something that seems more primitive, 
more elementary, more instinctual than the pleasure principle 
which it over-rides. But if a compulsion to repeat does operate 
in the mind, we should be glad to know something about it, 
to learn what function it corresponds to, under what conditions 
it can emerge and what its relation is to the pleasure principle 
— to which, after all, we have hitherto ascribed dominance over 
the course of the processes of excitation in mental life. 

1 [Before 1923 the last clause read: ‘the compulsion to repeat is as it 
were called to its help by the ego, clinging as it does to the pleasure 
principle.*] 



IV 


What follows is speculation, often far-fetched speculation, 
which the reader will consider or dismiss according to his indi- 
vidual predilection. It is further an attempt to follow out an 
idea consistently, out of curiosity to see where it will lead. 

Psycho-analytic speculation takes as its point of departure 
the impression, derived from examining unconscious processes, 
that consciousness may be, not the most universal attribute of 
mental processes, but only a particular function of them. 
Speaking in metapsychological terms, it asserts that conscious- 
ness is a function of a particular system which it describes as 
Cs . 1 What consciousness yields consists essentially of percep- 
tions of excitations coming from the external world and of 
feelings of pleasure and unpleasure which can only arise from 
within the mental apparatus; it is therefore possible to assign to 
the system PcpL-Cs . 2 a position in space. It must lie on the 
borderline between outside and inside; it must be turned to- 
wards the external world and must envelop the other psychical 
systems. It will be seen that there is nothing daringly new in 
these assumptions; we have merely adopted the views on 
localization held by cerebral anatomy, which locates the ‘seat* 
of consciousness in the cerebral cortex — the outermost, envelop- 
ing layer of the central organ. Cerebral anatomy has no need 
to consider why, speaking anatomically, consciousness should 
be lodged on the surface of the brain instead of being safely 
housed somewhere in its inmost interior. Perhaps we shall be 
more successful in accounting for this situation in the case of 
our system Pcpt.-Cs. 

Consciousness is not the only distinctive character which we 
ascribe to the processes in that system. On the basis of impres- 
sions derived from our psycho-analytic experience, we assume 
that all excitatory processes that occur in the other systems leave 

1 [See Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), Standard Ed., 5, 
610 ff, and ‘The Unconscious* (191 5r) , Section II.] 

1 [The system Pcpt. (the perceptual system) was first described by 
Freud in The Interpretation of Dreams, Standard Ed., 5, 536 ff. In a later 
paper (1917d) he argued that the system Pcpt coincided with the 
system Cs.] 

ift 



19 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

permanent traces behind in them which form the foundation of 
memory. Such memory-traces, then, have nothing to do with 
the fact of becoming conscious; indeed they are often most 
powerful and most enduring when the process which left them 
behind was one which never entered consciousness. We find it 
hard to believe, however, that permanent traces of excitation 
such as these are also left in the system Pcpt.-Cs . If they re- 
mained constantly conscious, they would very soon set limits 
to the system’s aptitude for receiving fresh excitations . 1 If, on 
the other hand, they were unconscious, we should be faced 
with the problem of explaining the existence of unconscious 
processes in a system whose functioning was otherwise accom- 
panied by the phenomenon of consciousness. We should, so to 
say, have altered nothing and gained nothing by our hypothesis 
relegating the process of becoming conscious to a special system. 
Though this consideration is not absolutely conclusive, it never- 
theless leads us to suspect that becoming conscious and leaving 
behind a memory-trace are processes incompatible with each 
other within one and the same system. Thus we should be able 
to say that the excitatory process becomes conscious in the 
system Cs. but leaves no permanent trace behind there; but 
that the excitation is transmitted to the systems lying next 
within and that it is in them that its traces are left. I followed 
these same lines in the schematic picture which I included in 
the speculative section of my Interpretation of Dreams . 2 It must 
be borne in mind that little enough is known from other sources 
of the origin of consciousness; when, therefore, we lay down the 
proposition that consciousness arises instead of a memory-trace , the 
assertion deserves consideration, at all events on the ground of 
its being framed in fairly precise terms. 

If this is so, then, the system Cs, is characterized by the 
peculiarity that in it (in contrast to what happens in the other 
psychical systems) excitatory processes do not leave behind any 
permanent change in its elements but expire, as it were, in the 
phenomenon of becoming conscious. An exception of this sort 

1 What follows is based throughout on Breuer’s views in [the second 
section of his theoretical contribution to] Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and 
Freud, 1895). [Freud himself discussed the subject in The Interpretation 
of Dreams , Standard Ed., 5, 538 and it had previously been fully con- 
sidered in his ‘Project’ of 1895 (1950a), Part I, Section 3. He returned to 
the topic later in his paper on the ‘Mystic Writing-Pad* (1925a).] 

a r Standard Ed.. 5. 538.1 



20 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

to the general rule requires to be explained by some factor that 
applies exclusively to that one system. Such a factor, which is 
absent in the other systems, might well be the exposed situation 
of the system Cs., immediately abutting as it does on the 
external world. 

Let us picture a living organism in its most simplified possible 
form as an undifferentiated vesicle of a substance that is 
susceptible to stimulation. Then the surface turned towards the 
external world will from its very situation be differentiated and 
will serve as an organ for receiving stimuli. Indeed embryology, 
in its capacity as a recapitulation of developmental history, 
actually shows us that the central nervous system originates 
from the ectoderm; the grey matter of the cortex remains a 
derivative of the primitive superficial layer of the organism and 
may have inherited some of its essential properties. It would be 
easy to suppose, then, that as a result of the ceaseless impact of 
external stimuli on the surface of the vesicle, its substance to a 
certain depth may have become permanently modified, so that 
excitatory processes run a different course in it from what they 
run in the deeper layers. A crust would thus be formed which 
would at last have been so thoroughly ‘baked through’ by 
stimulation that it would present the most favourable possible 
conditions for the reception of stimuli and become incapable of 
any further modification. In terms of the system Cs., this would 
mean that its elements could undergo no further permanent 
modification from the passage of excitation, because they had 
already been modified in the respect in question to the greatest 
possible extent: now, however, they would have become cap- 
able of giving rise to consciousness. Various ideas may be 
formed which cannot at present be verified as to the nature of 
this modification of the substance and of the excitatory process. 
It may be supposed that, in passing from one element to 
another, an excitation has to overcome a resistance, and that 
the diminution of resistance thus effected is what lays down a 
permanent trace of the excitation, that is, a facilitation. In 
the system Cs., then, resistance of this kind to passage from one 
element to another would no longer exist . 1 This picture can 
be brought into relation with Breuer’s distinction between 
quiescent (or bound) and mobile cathectic energy in the elements 

1 [This passage is foreshadowed in the later half of Section 3 of 
Part I of the ‘Project*.] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


21 


of the psychical systems ; 1 the elements of the system Cs. would 
carry no bound energy but only energy capable of free dis- 
charge. It seems best, however, to express oneself as cautiously 
as possible on these points. None the less, this speculation will 
have enabled us to bring the origin of consciousness into some 
sort of connection with the situation of the system Cs. and with 
the peculiarities that must be ascribed to the excitatory processes 
taking place in it. 

But we have more to say of the living vesicle with its receptive 
cortical layer. This little fragment of living substance is sus- 
pended in the middle of an external world charged with the 
most powerful energies; and it would be killed by the stimu- 
lation emanating from these if it were not provided with a 
protective shield against stimuli. It acquires the shield in this 
way: its outermost surface ceases to have the structure proper to 
living matter, becomes to some degree inorganic and thence- 
forward functions as a special envelope or membrane resistant 
to stimuli. In consequence, the energies of the external world 
are able to pass into the next underlying layers, which have 
remained living, with only a fragment of their original in- 
tensity; and these layers can devote themselves, behind the 
protective shield, to the reception of the amounts of stimulus 
which have been allowed through it. By its death, the outer 
layer has saved all the deeper ones from a similar fate — unless, 
that is to say, stimuli reach it which are so strong that they 
break through the protective shield. Protection against stimuli is 
an almost more important function for the living organism than 
reception of stimuli. The protective shield is supplied with its own 
store of energy and must above all endeavour to preserve the 
special modes of transformation of energy operating in it against 
the effects threatened by the enormous energies at work in the 
external world — effects which tend towards a levelling out of 
them and hence towards destruction. The main purpose of the 
reception of stimuli is to discover the direction and nature of the 
external stimuli; and for that it is enough to take small speci- 
mens of the external world, to sample it in small quantities. 
In highly developed organisms the receptive cortical layer of 
the former vesicle has long been withdrawn into the depths of 

1 Breuer and Freud, 1895. [See Section 2 of Breuer’s theoretical con- 
tribution, and in particular the footnote at the beginning of that section. 
Cf. also footnote 1 on p. 2 above.] 



22 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

the interior of the body, though portions of it have been left 
behind on the surface immediately beneath the general shield 
against stimuli. These are the sense organs, which consist 
essentially of apparatus for the reception of certain specific 
effects of stimulation, but which also include special arrange- 
ments for further protection against excessive amounts of stimu- 
lation and for excluding unsuitable kinds of stimuli . 1 It is char- 
acteristic of them that they deal only with very small quantities 
of external stimulation and only take in samples of the external 
world. They may perhaps be compared with feelers which are 
all the time making tentative advances towards the external 
world and then drawing back from it. 

At this point I shall venture to touch for a moment upon a 
subject which would merit the most exhaustive treatment. As 
a result of certain psycho-analytic discoveries, we are to-day in a 
position to embark on a discussion of the Kantian theorem that 
time and space are ‘necessary forms of thought*. We have learnt 
that unconscious mental processes are in themselves ‘timeless *. 2 
This means in the first place that they are not ordered tempor- 
ally, that time does not change them in any way and that the 
idea of time cannot be applied to them. These are negative char- 
acteristics which can only be clearly understood if a comparison 
is made with conscious mental processes. On the other hand, our 
abstract idea of time seems to be wholly derived from the 
method of working of the system Pcpt.-Cs. and to correspond to 
a perception on its own part of that method of working. This 
mode of functioning may perhaps constitute another way of 
providing a shield against stimuli. I know that these remarks 
must sound very obscure, but I must limit myself to these hints . 3 

We have pointed out how the living vesicle is provided with 
a shield against stimuli from the external world; and we had 
previously shown that the cortical layer next to that shield must 
be differentiated as an organ for receiving stimuli from without. 
This sensitive cortex, however, which is later to become the 
system Cs., also receives excitations from within. The situation 
of the system between the outside and the inside and the differ* 

1 [Cf. ‘Project’, Part I, Sections 5 and 9.] 

* [See Section V of ‘The Unconscious’ (1915*).] 

* [Freud recurs to the origin of the idea of time at the end of his paper 
on ‘The Mystic Writing-Pad* (1925a). The same paper contains a 
further discussion of the ‘shield against stimuli*.] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 23 

encc between the conditions governing the reception of excita- 
tions in the two cases have a decisive effect on the functioning of 
the system and of the whole mental apparatus. Towards the 
outside it is shielded against stimuli, and the amounts of excita- 
tion impinging on it have only a reduced effect. Towards the in- 
side there can be no such shield ; 1 the excitations in the deeper 
layers extend into the system directly and in undiminished 
amount, in so far as certain of their characteristics give rise to 
feelings in the pleasure-unpleasure series. The excitations 
coming from within are, however, in their intensity and in 
other, qualitative, respects — in their amplitude, perhaps — more 
commensurate with the system’s method of working than the 
stimuli which stream in from the external world . 2 This state of 
things produces two definite results. First, the feelings of pleasure 
and unpleasure (which are an index to what is happening in the 
interior of the apparatus) predominate over all external stimuli. 
And secondly, a particular way is adopted of dealing with any 
internal excitations which produce too great an increase of 
unpleasure: there is a tendency to treat them as though they 
were acting, not from the inside, but from the outside, so that 
it may be possible to bring the shield against stimuli into opera- 
tion as a means of defence against them. This is the origin of 
projection , which is destined to play such a large part in the 
causation of pathological processes. 

I have an impression that these last considerations have 
brought us to a better understanding of the dominance of the 
pleasure principle; but no light has yet been thrown on the cases 
that contradict that dominance. Let us therefore go a step 
further. We describe as ‘traumatic’ any excitations from outside 
which are powerful enough to break through the protective 
shield. It seems to me that the concept of trauma necessarily 
implies a connection of this kind with a breach in an otherwise 
efficacious barrier against stimuli. Such an event as an ex- 
ternal trauma is bound to provoke a disturbance on a large 
scale in the functioning of the organism’s energy and tn set in 
motion every possible defensive measure. At the same time, the 
pleasure principle is for the moment put out of action. There is 
no longer any possibility of preventing the mental apparatus 
from being flooded with large amounts of stimulus, and another 

1 fCf. ‘Project*, beginning of Section 10 of Part I.] 

* [Cf. ‘Project’, later part of Section 4 of Part I.] 



24 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

problem arises instead — the problem of mastering the amounts 
of stimulus which have broken in and of binding them, in the 
psychical sense, so that they can then be disposed of. 

The specific unpleasure of physical pain is probably the 
result of the protective shield having been broken through in a 
limited area. There is then a continuous stream of excitations 
from the part of the periphery concerned to the central 
apparatus of the mind, such as could normally arise only from 
within the apparatus . 1 And how shall we expect the mind to 
react to this invasion? Cathectic energy is summoned from all 
sides to provide sufficiently high cathexes of energy in the 
environs of the breach. An ‘anticathexis’ on a grand scale is set 
up, for whose benefit all the other psychical systems are im- 
poverished;, so that the remaining psychical functions are exten- 
sively paralysed or reduced. We must endeavour to draw a 
lesson from examples such as this and use them as a basis for 
our metapsychological speculations. From the present case, 
then, we infer that a system which is itself highly cathected is 
capable of taking up an additional stream of fresh inflowing 
energy and of converting it into quiescent cathexis, that is of 
binding it psychically. The higher the system’s own quiescent 
cathexis, the greater seems to be its binding force; conversely, 
therefore, the lower its cathexis, the less capacity will it have for 
taking up inflowing energy 2 and the more violent must be the 
consequences of such a breach in the protective shield against 
stimuli. To this view it cannot be justly objected that the 
increase of cathexis round the breach can be explained far more 
simply as the direct result of the inflowing masses of excitation. 
If that were so, the mental apparatus would merely receive an 
increase in its cathexes of energy, and the paralysing character 
of pain and the impoverishment of all the other systems would 
remain unexplained. Nor do the very violent phenomena of 
discharge to which pain gives rise affect our explanation, for 
they occur in a reflex manner — that is, they follow without the 
intervention of the mental apparatus. The indefiniteness of all 
our discussions on what we describe as metapsychology is of 
course due to the fact that we know nothing of the nature of 
the excitatory process that takes place in the elements of the 

1 Cf. ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes* (1915c) [and Addendum G of 
Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety (1926^/)]. 

* [Cf. the ‘principle of the insusceptibility to excitation of uncathected 
systems* in a footnote near the end of Freud, 1917d] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 25 

psychical systems, and that we do not feel justified in framing 
any hypothesis on the subject. We are consequently operating 
all the time with a large unknown factor, which we are 
obliged to carry over into every new formula. It may be reason- 
ably supposed that this excitatory process can be carried out 
with energies that vary quantitatively ; it may also seem probable 
that it has more than one quality (in the nature of amplitude, 
for instance). As a new factor we have taken into consideration 
Breuer’s hypothesis that charges of energy occur in two forms 
[see pp. 20-1]; so that we have to distinguish between two kinds 
of cathexis of the psychical systems or their elements — a freely 
flowing cathexis that presses on towards discharge and a 
quiescent cathexis. We may perhaps suspect that the binding 
of the energy that streams into the mental apparatus consists 
in its change from a freely flowing into a quiescent state. 

We may, I think, tentatively venture to regard the common 
traumatic neurosis as a consequence of an extensive breach 
being made in the protective shield against stimuli. This would 
seem to reinstate the old, naive theory of shock, in apparent 
contrast to the later and psychologically more ambitious 
theory which attributes aetiological importance not to the 
effects of mechanical violence but to fright and the threat to life. 
These opposing views are not, however, irreconcilable; nor is 
the psycho-analytic view of the traumatic neurosis identical with 
the shock theory in its crudest form. The latter regards the 
essence of the shock as being the direct damage to the molecular 
structure or even to the histological structure of the elements of 
the nervous system; whereas what we seek to understand are the 
effects produced on the organ of the mind by the breach in the 
shield against stimuli and by the problems that follow in its 
train. And we still attribute importance to the element of fright. 
It is caused by lack of any preparedness for anxiety, 1 including 
lack of hypercathexis of the systems that would be the first 
to receive the stimulus. Owing to their low cathexis those 
systems are not in a good position for binding the inflowing 
amounts of excitation and the consequences of the breach in 
the protective shield follow all the more easily. It will be seen, 
then, that preparedness for anxiety and the hypercathexis of the 
receptive systems constitute the last line of defence of the shield 
against stimuli. In the case of quite a number of traumas, the 

1 [Cf. footnote 1 on p. 7 above.] 



26 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

difference between systems that are unprepared and systems 
that are well prepared through being hypercathected may be a 
decisive factor in determining the outcome; though where the 
strength of a trauma exceeds a certain limit this factor will no 
doubt cease to carry weight. The fulfilment of wishes is, as we 
know, brought about in a hallucinatory manner by dreams, and 
under the dominance of the pleasure principle this has become 
their function. But it is not in the service of that principle that 
the dreams of patients suffering from traumatic neuroses lead 
them back with such regularity to the situation in which the 
trauma occurred. We may assume, rather, that dreams are 
here helping to carry out another task, which must be accom- 
plished before the dominance of the pleasure principle can even 
begin. These dreams are endeavouring to master the stimulus 
retrospectively, by developing the anxiety whose omission was 
the cause of the traumatic neurosis. They thus afford us a view 
of a function of the mental apparatus which, though it does not 
contradict the pleasure principle, is nevertheless independent of 
it and seems to be more primitive than the purpose of gaining 
pleasure and avoiding unpleasure. 

This would seem to be the place, then, at which to admit for 
the first time an exception to the proposition that dreams are 
fulfilments of wishes. Anxiety dreams, as I have shown 
repeatedly and in detail, offer no such exception. Nor do 
‘punishment dreams’, for they merely replace the forbidden 
wish-fulfilment by the appropriate punishment for it; that is to 
say, they fulfil the wish of the sense of guilt which is the reaction 
to the repudiated impulse . 1 But it is impossible to classify as 
wish-fulfilments the dreams we have been discussing which 
occur in traumatic neuroses, or the dreams during psycho- 
analyses which bring to memory the psychical traumas of child- 
hood. They arise, rather, in obedience to the compulsion to 
repeat, though it is true that in analysis that compulsion is 
supported by the wish (which is encouraged by ‘suggestion’) 2 
to conjure up what has been forgotten and repressed. Thus it 
would seem that the function of dreams, which consists in 

1 [See The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), Standard Ed., 5, 557, and 
Section 9 of Freud’s ‘Remarks on the Theory and Practice of Dream- 
Interpretation’ (1923c).) 

* [The clause in brackets was substituted in 1923 for the words ‘which 
is not unconscious* which appeared in the earlier editions.] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 27 

setting aside any motives that might interrupt sleep, by fulfilling 
the wishes of the disturbing impulses, is not their original 
function. It would not be possible for them to perform that 
function until the whole of mental life had accepted the domin- 
ance of the pleasure principle. If there is a ‘beyond the pleasure 
principle’, it is only consistent to grant that there was also a 
time before the purpose of dreams was the fulfilment of wishes. 
This would imply no denial of their later function. But if once 
this general rule has been broken, a further question arises. 
May not dreams which, with a view to the psychical binding of 
traumatic impressions, obey the compulsion to repeat — may not 
such dreams occur outside analysis as well? And the reply can 
only be a decided affirmative. 

I have argued elsewhere 1 that ‘war neuroses’ (in so far 
as that term implies something more than a reference to the 
circumstances of the illness’s onset) may very well be traumatic 
neuroses which have been facilitated by a conflict in the ego. 
The fact to which I have referred on page 6, that a gross 
physical injury caused simultaneously by the trauma diminishes 
the chances that a neurosis will develop, becomes intelligible if 
one bears in mind two facts which have been stressed by 
psycho- analytic research: firstly, that mechanical agitation must 
be recognized as one of the sources of sexual excitation, 3 and 
secondly, that painful and feverish illnesses exercise a powerful 
effect, so long as they last, on the distribution of libido. Thus, on 
the one hand, the mechanical violence of the trauma would 
liberate a quantity of sexual excitation which, owing to the lack 
of preparation for anxiety, would have a traumatic effect; but, 
on the other hand, the simultaneous physical injury, by calling 
for a narcissistic hypercathexis of the injured organ, 3 would 
bind the excess of excitation. It is also well known, though the 
libido theory has not yet made sufficient use of the fact, that 
such severe disorders in the distribution of libido as melancholia 
are temporarily brought to an end by intercurrent organic 
illness, and indeed that even a fully developed condition of 
dementia praecox is capable of a temporary remission in these 
same circumstances. 

1 See my introduction (1919*/) to Psycho-Analysis and the War Neuroses. 

2 Cf. my remarks elsewhere ( Three Essays [ Standard Ed. y 7, 201-2; 
I.P.L., 57, 67-8]) on the effect of swinging and railway-travel. 

3 See my paper on narcissism (1914r) [Beginning of Section II], 



V 


The fact that the cortical layer which receives stimuli is without 
any protective shield against excitations from within must have 
as its result that these latter transmissions of stimulus have a 
preponderance in economic importance and often occasion 
economic disturbances comparable with traumatic neuroses. 
The most abundant sources of this internal excitation are what 
are described as the organism’s instincts’ — the representatives 
of all the forces originating in the interior of the body and trans- 
mitted to the mental apparatus — at once the most important 
and the most obscure element of psychological research. 

It will perhaps not be thought too rash to suppose that the 
impulses arising from the instincts do not belong to the type of 
bound nervous processes but of freely mobile processes which 
press towards discharge. The best part of what we know of these 
processes is derived from our study of the dream- work. We there 
discovered that the processes in the unconscious systems were 
fundamentally different from those in the preconscious (or con- 
scious) systems. In the unconscious, cathexes can easily be 
completely transferred, displaced and condensed. Such treat- 
ment, however, could produce only invalid results if it were 
applied to preconscious material; and this accounts for the 
familiar peculiarities exhibited by manifest dreams after the 
preconscious residues of the preceding day have been worked 
over in accordance with the laws operating in the unconscious. 
I described the type of process found in the unconscious as the 
‘primary’ psychical process, in contradistinction to the ‘secon- 
dary’ process which is the one obtaining in our normal waking 
life. Since all instinctual impulses have the unconscious systems 
as their point of impact, it is hardly an innovation to say that 
they obey the primary process. Again, it is easy to identify 
the primary psychical process with Breuer’s freely mobile 
cathexis and the secondary process with changes in his bound or 
tonic cathexis . 1 If so, it would be the task of the higher strata of 
the mental apparatus to bind the instinctual excitation reaching 

1 Cf. my Interpretation of Dreams, Chapter VII [Standard Ed., 5, 588 ff. 
Cf. also Breuer and Freud, 1895 (Section 2 of Breuer’s theoretical con- 
tribution)]. 


28 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 29 

the primary process. A failure to effect this binding would 
provoke a disturbance analogous to a traumatic neurosis; and 
only after the binding has been accomplished would it be 
possible for the dominance of the pleasure principle (and of its 
modification, the reality principle) to proceed unhindered. Till 
then the other task of the mental apparatus, the task of master- 
ing or binding excitations, would have precedence — not, indeed, 
in opposition to the pleasure principle, but independently of it 
and to some extent in disregard of it. 

The manifestations of a compulsion to repeat (which we have 
described as occurring in the early activities of infantile mental 
life as well as among the events of psycho-analytic treatment) 
exhibit to a high degree an instinctual 1 * * * * character and, when 
they act in opposition to the pleasure principle, give the appear- 
ance of some ‘daemonic’ force at work. In the case of children’s 
play we seemed to see that children repeat unpleasurable 
experiences for the additional reason that they can master a 
powerful impression far more thoroughly by being active than 
they could by merely experiencing it passively. Each fresh 
repetition seems to strengthen the mastery they are in search of. 
Nor can children have their pleasurable experiences repeated 
often enough, and they are inexorable in their insistence that 
the repetition shall be an identical one. This character trait 
disappears later on. If a joke is heard for a second time it 
produces almost no effect; a theatrical production never creates 
so great an impression the second time as the first; indeed, it is 
hardly possible to persuade an adult who has very much enjoyed 
reading a book to re-read it immediately. Novelty is always the 
condition of enjoyment. But children will never tire of asking 
an adult to repeat a game that he has shown them or played 
with them, till he is too exhausted to go on. And if a child has 
been told a nice story, he will insist on hearing it over and over 
again rather than a new one; and he will remorselessly stipulate 
that the repetition shall be an identical one and will correct any 
alterations of which the narrator may be guilty — though they may 
actually have been made in the hope of gaining fresh approval. 8 

1 [‘ Triebhafi* here and at the beginning of the next paragraph. The 

word * Trieb * bears much more of a feeling of urgency than the English 

‘instinct’.] 

* [Cf. some remarks on this towards the end of the sixth section of 

Chapter VII of Freud’s book on jokes (1905c).] 



tSEXUND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


5U 

None of this contradicts the pleasure principle; repetition, 
the re-experiencing of something identical, is clearly in itself 
a source of pleasure. In the case of a person in analysis, 
on the contrary, the compulsion to repeat the events of his 
childhood in the transference evidently disregards the pleasure 
principle in ev^ry way. The patient behaves in a purely infantile 
fashion and thus shows us that the repressed memory-traces of 
his primaeval experiences are not present in him in a bound 
state and are indeed in a sense incapable of obeying the secon- 
dary process. It is to this fact of not being bound, moreover, that 
they owe their capacity for forming, in conjunction with the 
residues of the previous day, a wishful phantasy that emerges 
in a dream. This same compulsion to repeat frequently meets us 
as an obstacle to our treatment when at the end of an analysis 
we try to induce the patient to detach himself completely from 
his physician. It may be presumed, too, that when people un- 
familiar with analysis feel an obscure fear — a dread of rousing 
something that, so they feel, is better left sleeping — what they 
are afraid of at bottom is the emergence of this compulsion 
with its hint of possession by some ‘daemonic* power. 

But how is the predicate of being ‘instinctual 5 1 related to the 
compulsion to repeat? At this point we cannot escape a suspicion 
that we may have come upon the track of a universal attribute 
of instincts and perhaps of organic life in general which has 
not hitherto been clearly recognized or at least not explicitly 
stressed. 2 It seems , then , that an instinct is an urge inherent in organic 
life to restore an earlier state of things which the living entity has 
been obliged to abandon under the pressure of external dis- 
turbing forces; that is, it is a kind of organic elasticity, or, to 
put it another way, the expression of the inertia inherent in 
organic life . 3 

This view of instincts strikes us as strange because we have 
become used to see in them a factor impelling towards change 
and development, whereas we are now asked to recognize in 
them the precise contrary — an expression of the conservative 
nature of living substance. On the other hand we soon call to 
mind examples from animal life which seem to confirm the 

1 [See the last footnote but one.] 

* [The last six words were added in 1921 .] 

* I have no doubt that similar notions as to the nature of ‘instincts* 
have already been put forward repeatedly. 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


31 


view that instincts are historically determined. Certain fishes, 
for instance, undertake laborious migrations at spawning-time 
in order to deposit their spawn in particular waters far removed 
from their customary haunts. In the opinion of many biologists 
what they are doing is merely to seek out the localities in which 
their species formerly resided but which in the course of time 
they have exchanged for others. The same explanation is 
believed to apply to the migratory flights of birds of passage — 
but we are quickly relieved of the necessity for seeking for 
further examples by the reflection that the most impressive 
proofs of there being an organic compulsion to repeat lie in the 
phenomena of heredity and the facts of embryology. We see 
how the germ of a living animal is obliged in the course of its 
development to recapitulate (even if only in a transient and 
abbreviated fashion) the structures of all the forms from which 
it is sprung, instead of proceeding quickly by the shortest path 
to its final shape. This behaviour is only to a very slight degree 
attributable to mechanical causes, and the historical explana- 
tion cannot accordingly be neglected. So too the power of 
regenerating a lost organ by growing afresh a precisely similar 
one extends far up into the animal kingdom. 

We shall be met by the plausible objection that it may very 
well be that, in addition to the conservative instincts which impel 
towards repetition, there may be others which push forward 
towards progress and the production of new forms. This argu- 
ment must certainly not be overlooked, and it will be taken into 
account at a later stage . 1 * But for the moment it is tempting to 
pursue to its logical conclusion the hypothesis that all instincts 
tend towards the restoradon of an earlier state of things. The 
outcome may give an impression of mysticism or of sham pro- 
fundity; but we can feel quite innocent of having had any such 
purpose in view. We seek only for the sober results of research 
or of reflection based on it; and we have no wish to find in those 
results any quality other than certainty . 3 

Let us suppose, then, that all the organic instincts are 
conservative, are acquired historically and tend towards the 

1 [The last half of this sentence was added in 1921.] 

3 [Footnote added 1925:] The reader should not overlook the fact 

that what follows is the development of an extreme line of thought. 
Later on, when account is taken of the sexual instincts, it will be found 
that the necessary limitations and corrections are applied to it. 



32 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

restoration of an earlier state of things. It follows that the pheno 
mena of organic development must be attributed to externa 
disturbing and diverting influences. The elementary living 
entity would from its very beginning have had no wish tc 
change; if conditions remained the same, it would do no mor< 
than constantly repeat the same course of life. In the last resort 
what has left its mark on the development of organisms must be 
the history of the earth we live in and of its relation to the sun. 
Every modification which is thus imposed upon the course oi 
the organism’s life is accepted by the conservative organic 
instincts and stored up for further repetition. Those instincts are 
therefore bound to give a deceptive appearance of being forces 
tending towards change and progress, whilst in fact they are 
merely seeking to reach an ancient goal by paths alike old and 
new. Moreover it is possible to specify this final goal of all 
organic striving. It would be in contradiction to the conserva- 
tive nature of the instincts if the goal of life were a state of 
things which had never yet been attained. On the contrary, it 
must be an old state of things, an initial state from which the 
living entity has at one time or other departed and to which 
it is striving to return by the circuitous paths along which its 
development leads. If we are to take it as a truth that knows no 
exception that everything living dies for internal reasons — 
becomes inorganic once again — then we shall be compelled to 
say that 'the aim of all life is death * and, looking backwards, that 
inanimate things existed before living ones\ 

The attributes of life were at some time evoked in inanimate 
matter by the action of a force of whose nature we can form no 
conception. It may perhaps have been a process similar in type 
to that which later caused the development of consciousness in a 
particular stratum of living matter. The tension which then 
arose in what had hitherto been an inanimate substance endeav- 
oured to cancel itself out. In this way the first instinct came into 
being: the instinct to return to the inanimate state. It was still 
an easy matter at that time for a living substance to die; the 
course of its life was probably only a brief one, whose direction 
was determined by the chemical structure of the young life. 
For a long time, perhaps, living substance was thus being con- 
stantly created afresh and easily dying, till decisive external 
influences altered in such a way as to oblige the still surviving 
substance to diverge ever more widely from its original course 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


33 


of life and to make ever more complicated detours before 
reaching its aim of death. These circuitous paths to death, faith- 
fully kept to by the conservative instincts, would thus present 
us to-day with the picture of the phenomena of life. If we 
firmly maintain the exclusively conservative nature of instincts, 
we cannot arrive at any other notions as to the origin and aim 
of life. 

The implications in regard to the great groups of instincts 
which, as we believe, lie behind the phenomena of life in 
organisms must appear no less bewildering. The hypothesis of 
self-preservative instincts, such as we attribute to all living 
beings, stands in marked opposition to the idea that instinctual 
life as a whole serves to bring about death. Seen in this light, 
the theoretical importance of the instincts of self-preservation, 
of self-assertion and of mastery greatly diminishes. They are 
component instincts whose function it is to assure that the 
organism shall follow its own path to death, and to ward off 
any possible ways of returning to inorganic existence other than 
those which are immanent in the organism itself. We have no 
longer to reckon with the organism’s puzzling determination (so 
hard to fit into any context) to maintain its own existence in the 
face of every obstacle. What we are left with is the fact that the 
organism wishes to die only in its own fashion. Thus these 
guardians of life, too, were originally the myrmidons of death. 
Hence arises the paradoxical situation that the living organism 
struggles most energetically against events (dangers, in fact) 
which might help it to attain its life’s aim rapidly — by a kind of 
short-circuit. Such behaviour is, however, precisely what char- 
acterizes purely instinctual as contrasted with intelligent 
efforts . 1 

But let us pause for a moment and reflect. It cannot be so. 
The sexual instincts, to which the theory of the neuroses gives 
a quite special place, appear under a very different aspect. 

The external pressure which provokes a constantly increasing 
extent of development has not imposed itself upon every 
organism. Many have succeeded in remaining up to the present 
time at their lowly level. Many, though not all, such creatures, 
which must resemble the earliest stages of the higher animals 

1 [In the editions before 1925 the following footnote appeared at this 
point. *A correction of this extreme view of the self-preservative instincts 
follows.*) 



34 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

and plants, are, indeed, living to-day. In the same way, the whole 
path of development to natural death is not trodden by all the 
elementary entities which compose the complicated body of one 
of the higher organisms. Some of them, the germ-cells, probably 
retain the original structure of living matter and, after a certain 
time, with their full complement of inherited and freshly 
acquired instinctual dispositions, separate themselves from the 
organism as a whole. These two characteristics may be precisely 
what enables them to have an independent existence. Under 
favourable conditions, they begin to develop — that is, to repeat 
the performance to which they owe their existence; and in the 
end once again one portion of their substance pursues its 
development to a finish, while another portion harks back once 
again as a fresh residual germ to the beginning of the process 
of development. These germ-cells, therefore, work against the 
death of the living substance and succeed in winning for it 
what we can only regard as potential immortality, though that 
may mean no more than a lengthening of the road to death. 
We must regard as in the highest degree significant the fact 
that this function of the germ-cell is reinforced, or only made 
possible, if it coalesces with another cell similar to itself and yet 
differing from it. 

The instincts which watch over the destinies of these elemen- 
tary organisms that survive the whole individual, which provide 
them with a safe shelter while they are defenceless against the 
stimuli of the external world, which bring about their meeting 
with other germ-cells, and so on — these constitute the group of 
the sexual instincts. They are conservative in the same sense 
as the other instincts in that they bring back earlier states of 
living substance; but they are conservative to a higher degree 
in that they are peculiarly resistant to external influences; and 
they are conservative too in another sense in that they preserve 
life itself for a comparatively long period . 1 They are the true 
life instincts. They operate against the purpose of the other 
instincts, which leads, by reason of their function, to death; and 
this fact indicates that there is an opposition between them and 
the other instincts, an opposition whose importance was long 
ago recognized by the theory of the neuroses. It is as though the 

1 [. Footnote added 1923:] Yet it is to them alone that we can attribute 
an internal impulse towards ‘progress’ and towards higher development! 
(See below [pp. 42-3].) 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 35 

life of the organism moved with a vacillating rhythm. One 
group of instincts rushes forward so as to reach the final aim 
of life as swiftly as possible; but when a particular stage in the 
advance has been reached, the other group jerks back to a 
certain point to make a fresh start and so prolong the journey. 
And even though it is certain that sexuality and the distinction 
between the sexes did not exist when life began, the possibility 
remains that the instincts which were later to be described as 
sexual may have been in operation from the very first, and it 
may not be true that it was only at a later time that they started 
upon their work of opposing the activities of the ‘ego-instincts ’. 1 

Let us now hark back for a moment ourselves and consider 
whether there is any basis at all for these speculations. Is it 
really the case that, apart from the sexual instincts , 8 there are no 
instincts that do not seek to restore an earlier state of things? 
that there are none that aim at a state of things which has never 
yet been attained? I know of no certain example from the 
organic world that would contradict the characterization I have 
thus proposed. There is unquestionably no universal instinct 
towards higher development observable in the animal or plant 
world, even though it is undeniable that development does in 
fact occur in that direction. But on the one hand it is often 
merely a matter of opinion when we declare that one stage of 
development is higher than another, and on the other hand 
biology teaches us that higher development in one respect is 
very frequently balanced or outweighed by involution in 
another. Moreover there are plenty of animal forms from whose 
early stages we can infer that their development has, on the 
contrary, assumed a retrograde character. Both higher develop- 
ment and involution might well be the consequences of adapta- 
tion to the pressure of external forces; and in both cases the 
part played by instincts might be limited to the retention (in 
the form of an internal source of pleasure) of an obligatory 
modification . 3 

1 [Footnote added 1925:] It should be understood from the context 
that the term ‘ego-instincts* is used here as a provisional description and 
derives from the earliest psycho-analytical terminology. [See below, 
pp. 44-5 and 55.] 

1 [These five words were italicized from 1921 onwards.] 

* Ferenczi (1913, 137) has reached the same conclusion along differ- 
ent lines: ‘If this thought is pursued to its logical conclusion, one must 
make oneself familiar with the idea of a tendency to perseveration or 



36 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

It may be difficult, too, for many of us, to abandon the belief 
that there is an instinct towards perfection at work in human 
beings, which has brought them to their present high level of 
intellectual achievement and ethical sublimation and which 
may be expected to watch over their development into super- 
men. I have no faith, however, in the existence of any such 
internal instinct and I cannot see how this benevolent illusion 
is to be preserved. The present development of human beings 
requires, as it seems to me, no different explanation from that of 
animals. What appears in a minority of human individuals as 
an untiring impulsion towards further perfection can easily be 
understood as a result of the instinctual repression upon which 
is based all that is most precious in human civilization. The 
repressed instinct never ceases to strive for complete satisfaction, 
which would consist in the repetition of a primary experience 
of satisfaction. No substitutive or reactive formations and no 
sublimations will suffice to remove the repressed instinct’s 
persisting tension; and it is the difference in amount between 
the pleasure of satisfaction which is demanded and that which is 
actually achieved that provides the driving factor which will 
permit of no halting at any position attained, but, in the poet’s 
words, 'ungebandigt immer vorwdrts dring?. 1 The backward path 
that leads to complete satisfaction is as a rule obstructed by 
the resistances which maintain the repressions. So there is no 
alternative but to advance in the direction in which growth is 
still free — though with no prospect of bringing the process to 
a conclusion or of being able to reach the goal. The processes 
involved in the formation of a neurotic phobia, which is nothing 
else than an attempt at flight from the satisfaction of an instinct, 
present us with a model of the manner of origin of this sup- 
posititious ‘instinct towards perfection’ — an instinct which can- 
not possibly be attributed to every human being. The dynamic 
conditions for its development are, indeed, universally present; 
but it is only in rare cases that the economic situation appears 
to favour the production of the phenomenon. 

I will add only a word to suggest that the efforts of Eros to 

regression dominating organic life as well, while the tendency to further 
development, to adaptation, etc., would become active only as a result 
of external stimuli.’ 

1 [‘Presses ever forward unsubdued.’] Mephistopheles in Faust , Part I 
[Scene 4]. 



37 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

combine organic substances into ever larger unities probably 
provide a substitute for this ‘instinct towards perfection* whose 
existence we cannot admit. The phenomena that are attributed 
to it seem capable of explanation by these efforts of Eros taken 
in conjunction with the results of repression . 1 

1 [This paragraph, which was added in 1923, anticipates the account 
of Eros that is to follow in the next chapter, p. 44 If.] 



VI 


The upshot of our enquiry so far has been the drawing of g 
sharp distinction between the ‘ego-instincts’ and the sexual 
instincts, and the view that the former exercise pressure toward* 
death and the latter towards a prolongation of life. But thi* 
conclusion is bound to be unsatisfactory in many respects ever 
to ourselves. Moreover, it is actually only of the former group o; 
instincts that we can predicate a conservative, or rather retro- 
grade, character corresponding to a compulsion to repeat. Foi 
on our hypothesis the ego-instincts arise from the coming tc 
life of inanimate matter and seek to restore the inanimate state; 
whereas as regards the sexual instincts, though it is true that 
they reproduce primitive states of the organism, what the) 
are clearly aiming at by every possible means is the coalescence 
of two germ-cells which are differentiated in a particular way, 
If this union is not effected, the germ-cell dies along with all the 
other elements of the multicellular organism. It is only on this 
condition that the sexual function can prolong the cell’s life and 
lend it the appearance of immortality. But what is the import- 
ant event in the development of living substance which is being 
repeated in sexual reproduction, or in its fore-runner, the con- 
jugation of two protista? 1 We cannot say; and we should con- 
sequently feel relieved if the whole structure of our argument 
turned out to be mistaken. The opposition between the ego or 
death instincts * and the sexual or life instincts would then cease 
to hold and the compulsion to repeat would no longer possess 
the importance we have ascribed to it. 

Let us turn back, then, to one of the assumptions that we 
have already made, with the expectation that we shall be able 
to give it a categorical denial. We have drawn far-reaching 
conclusions from the hypothesis that all living substance is 
bound to die from internal causes. We made this assumption 
thus carelessly because it does not seem to us to be an assump- 
tion. We are accustomed to think that such is the fact, and we 

1 [In what follows Freud appears to use the terms ‘protista* and ‘pro- 
tozoa* indifferently to signify unicellular organisms. The translation 
follows the original.] 

* (The first published appearance of the term.] 

38 



39 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

are strengthened in our thought by the writings of our poets. 
Perhaps we have adopted the belief because there is some com- 
fort in it. If we are to die ourselves, and first to lose in death 
those who are dearest to us, it is easier to submit to a remorse- 
less law of nature, to the sublime 9 Av&yxY} [Necessity], than to 
a chance which might perhaps have been escaped. It may be, 
however, that this belief in the internal necessity of dying is 
only another of those illusions which we have created l um die 
Schwere des Daseins zu ertragen’. 1 It is certainly not a primaeval 
belief. The notion of ‘natural death 9 is quite foreign to primi- 
tive races; they attribute every death that occurs among them 
to the influence of an enemy or of an evil spirit. We must 
therefore turn to biology in order to test the validity of the 
belief. 

If we do so, we may be astonished to find how little agree- 
ment there is among biologists on the subject of natural death 
and in fact that the whole concept of death melts away under 
their hands. The fact that there is a fixed average duration of 
life at least among the higher animals naturally argues in favour 
of there being such a thing as death from natural causes. But 
this impression is countered when we consider that certain large 
animals and certain gigantic arboreal growths reach a very 
advanced age and one which cannot at present be computed. 
According to the large conception of Wilhelm Fliess [1906], all 
the phenomena of life exhibited by organism — and also, no 
doubt, their death — are linked with the completion of fixed 
periods, which express the dependence of two kinds of living 
substance (one male and the other female) upon the solar year. 
When we see, however, how easily and how extensively the 
influence of external forces is able to modify the date of the 
appearance of vital phenomena (especially in the plant world) 
— to precipitate them or hold them back— doubts must be cast 
upon the rigidity of Fliess 5 s formulas or at least upon whether 
the laws laid down by him are the sole determining factors. 

The greatest interest attaches from our point of view to the 
treatment given to the subject of the duration of life and the 
death of organisms in the writings of Weismann (1882, 1884, 
1892, etc.) It was he who introduced the division of living 
substance into mortal and immortal parts. The mortal part is 

1 [‘To bear the burden of existence.’ (Schiller, Die Braut von Messina , 

I, 8.] 



40 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

the body in the narrower sense — the ‘soma’ — which alone is 
subject to natural death. The germ-cells, on the other hand, are 
potentially immortal, in so far as they are able, under certain 
favourable conditions, to develop into a new individual, or, in 
other words, to surround themselves with a new soma. (Weis- 
mann, 1884.) 

What strikes us in this is the unexpected analogy with our 
own view, which was arrived at along such a different path. 
Weismann, regarding living substance morphologically, sees in 
it one portion which is destined to die — the soma, the body 
apart from the substance concerned with sex and inheritance — 
and an immortal portion — the germ-plasm, which is concerned 
with the survival of the species, with reproduction. We, on the 
other hand, dealing not with the living substance but with the 
forces operating in it, have been led to distinguish two kinds of 
instincts: those which seek to lead what is living to death, and 
others, the sexual instincts, which are perpetually attempting 
and achieving a renewal of life. This sounds like a dynamic 
corollary to Weismann’s morphological theory. 

But the appearance of a significant correspondence is dis- 
sipated as soon as we discover Weismann’s views on the problem 
of death. For he only relates the distinction between the mortal 
soma and the immortal germ-plasm to multicellular organisms; in 
unicellular organisms the individual and the reproductive cell 
are still one and the same (Weismann, 1882, 38). Thus he con- 
siders that unicellular organisms are potentially immortal, and 
that death only makes its appearance with the multicellular 
metazoa. It is true that this death of the higher organisms is a 
natural one, a death from internal causes; but it is not founded 
on any primal characteristic of living substance (Weismann, 
1884, 84) and cannot be regarded as an absolute necessity with 
its basis in the very nature of life (Weismann, 1882, 33). Death 
is rather a matter of expediency, a manifestation of adaptation 
to the external conditions of life; for, when once the cells of the 
body have been divided into soma and germ-plasm, an un- 
limited duration of individual life would become a quite point- 
less luxury. When this differentiation had been made in the 
multicellular organisms, death became possible and expedient. 
Since then, the soma of the higher organisms has died at fixed 
periods for internal reasons, while the protista have remained 
immortal. It is not the case, on the other hand, that reproduc- 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 41 

don was only introduced at the same time as death. On the 
contrary, it is a primal characteristic of living matter, like 
growth (from which it originated), and life has been continuous 
from its first beginning upon earth. (Weismann, 1884, 84 f.) 

It will be seen at once that to concede in this way that higher 
organisms have a natural death is of very little help to us. For 
if death is a late acquisition of organisms, then there can be 
no question of there having been death instincts from the very 
beginning of life on this earth. Multicellular organisms may die 
for internal reasons, owing to defective differentiation or to 
imperfections in their metabolism, but the matter is of no 
interest from the point of view of our problem. An account of 
the origin of death such as this is moreover far less at variance 
with our habitual modes of thought than the strange assumption 
of ‘death instincts*. 

The discussion which followed upon Weismann’s suggestions 
led, so far as I can see, to no conclusive results in any direction. 1 
Some writers returned to the views of Goette (1883), who re- 
garded death as a direct result of reproduction. Hartmann 
(1906, 29) does not regard the appearance of a ‘dead body* — a 
dead portion of the living substance — as the criterion of death, 
but defines death as ‘the termination of individual develop- 
ment*. In this sense protozoa too are mortal; in their case death 
always coincides with reproduction, but is to some extent 
obscured by it, since the whole substance of the parent animal 
may be transmitted directly into the young offspring. 

Soon afterwards research was directed to the experimental 
testing on unicellular organisms of the alleged immortality 
of living substance. An American biologist, Woodruff, experi- 
menting with a ciliate infusorian, the ‘slipper-animalcule*, 
which reproduces by fission into two individuals, persisted until 
the 3029th generation (at which point he broke off the experi- 
ment), isolating one of the part-products on each occasion and 
placing it in fresh water. This remote descendent of the first 
slipper-animalcule was just as lively as its ancestor and showed 
no signs of ageing or degeneration. Thus, in so far as figures of 
this kind prove anything, the immortality of the protista seemed 
to be experimentally demonstrable.® 

Other experimenters arrived at different results. Maupas, 

1 Cf. Hartmann (1906), Lipschutz (1914) and Doflein (1919). 

* For this and what follows see Lipschutz (1914, 26 and 52 ff.). 



42 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

Calkins and others, in contrast to Woodruff, found that after a 
certain number of divisions these infusoria become weaker, 
diminish in size, suffer the loss of some part of their organization 
and eventually die, unless certain recuperative measures are 
applied to them. If this is so, protozoa would appear to die 
after a phase of senescence exactly like the higher animals — thus 
completely contradicting Weismann’s assertion that death is a 
late acquisition of living organisms. 

From the aggregate of these experiments two facts emerge 
which seem to offer us a firm footing. 

First: If two of the animalculae, at the moment before they 
show signs of senescence, are able to coalesce with each other, 
that is to ‘conjugate’ (soon after which they once more 
separate), they are saved from growing old and become ‘re- 
juvenated*. Conjugation is no doubt the fore-runner of the 
sexual reproduction of higher creatures; it is as yet unconnected 
with propagation and is limited to the mixing of the substances 
of the two individuals. (Weismann’s ‘amphimixis’.) The re- 
cuperative effects of conjugation can, however, be replaced by 
certain stimulating agents, by alterations in the composition of 
the fluid which provides their nourishment, by raising their 
temperature or by shaking them. We are reminded of the 
celebrated experiment made by J. Loeb, in which, by means of 
certain chemical stimuli, he induced segmentation in sea-urchins’ 
eggs — a process which can normally occur only after fertilization. 

Secondly: It is probable nevertheless that infusoria die a 
natural death as a result of their own vital processes. For the 
contradiction between Woodruff’s findings and the others is due 
to his having provided each generation with fresh nutrient fluid. 
If he omitted to do so, he observed the same signs of senescence 
as the other experimenters. He concluded that the animalculae 
were injured by the products of metabolism which they ex- 
truded into the surrounding fluid. He was then able to prove 
conclusively that it was only the products of its own metabolism 
which had fatal results for the particular kind of animalcule. 
For the same animalculae which inevitably perished if they were 
crowded together in their own nutrient fluid flourished in a 
solution which was over-saturated with the waste products of a 
distantly related species. An infusorian, therefore, if it is left to 
itself, dies a natural death owing to its incomplete voidance of 
the products of its own metabolism. (It may be that the same 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 43 

incapacity is the ultimate cause of the death of all higher 
animals as well.) 

At this point the question may well arise in our minds 
whether any object whatever is served by trying to solve the 
problem of natural death from a study of the protozoa. The 
primitive organization of these creatures may conceal from our 
eyes important conditions which, though in fact present in them 
too, only become visible in higher animals where they are able to 
find morphological expression. And if we abandon the morpho- 
logical point of view and adopt the dynamic one, it becomes a 
matter of complete indifference to us whether natural death 
can be shown to occur in protozoa or not. The substance which 
is later recognized as being immortal has not yet become 
separated in them from the mortal one. The instinctual forces 
which seek to conduct life into death may also be operating in 
protozoa from the first, and yet their effects may be so com- 
pletely concealed by the life-preserving forces that it may be 
very hard to find any direct evidence of thfeir presence. We have 
seen, moreover, that the observations made by biologists allow 
us to assume that internal processes of this kind leading to death 
do occur also in protista. But even if protista turned out to be 
immortal in Weismann’s sense, his assertion that death is a late 
acquisition would apply only to its manifest phenomena and 
would not make impossible the assumption of processes tending 
towards it. 

Thus our expectation that biology would flatly contradict the 
recognition of death instincts has not been fulfilled. We are at 
liberty to continue concerning ourselves with their possibility, 
if we have other reasons for doing so. The striking similarity 
between WeismamYs distinction of soma and germ-plasm and 
our separation of the death instincts from the life instincts 
persists and retains its significance. 

We may pause for a moment over this pre-eminently dualistic 
view of instinctual life. According to E. Hering’s theory, two 
kinds of processes are constantly at work in living substance, 
operating in contrary directions, one constructive or assimi- 
iatory and the other destructive or dissimilatory. May we 
venture to recognize in these two directions taken by the vital 
processes the activity of our two instinctual impulses, the life 
instincts and the death instincts? There is something else, at any 
rate, that we cannot remain blind to. We have unwittingly 



44 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


steered our course into the harbour of Schopenhauer’s philo- 
sophy. For him death is the ‘true result and to that extent the 
purpose of life’, 1 while the sexual instinct is the embodiment of 
the will to live. [Cf. the Appendix to Freud, 1925*?.] 

Let us make a bold attempt at another step forward. It is 
generally considered that the union of a number of cells into 
a vital association — the multicellular character of organisms — - 
has become a means of prolonging their life. One cell helps to 
preserve the life of another, and the community of cells can 
survive even if individual cells have to die. We have already 
heard that conjugation, too, the temporary coalescence of two 
unicellular organisms, has a life-preserving and rejuvenating 
effect on both of them. Accordingly, we might attempt to apply 
the libido theory which has been arrived at in psycho-analysis to 
the mutual relationship of cells. We might suppose that the life 
instincts or sexual instincts which are active in each cell take the 
other cells as their object, that they partly neutralize the death 
instincts (that is, the processes set up by them) in those cells 
and thus preserve their life; while the other cells do the same for 
them t, and still others sacrifice themselves in the performance of 
this libidinal function. The germ-cells themselves would behave 
in a completely ‘narcissistic’ fashion — to use the phrase that we 
are accustomed to use in the theory of the neuroses to describe 
a whole individual who retains his libido in his ego and pays 
none of it out in object-cathexes. The germ-cells require their 
libido, the activity of their life instincts, for themselves, as a 
reserve against their later momentous constructive activity. 
(The cells of the malignant neoplasms which destroy the 
organism should also perhaps be described as narcissistic in this 
same sense: pathology is prepared to regard their germs as 
innate and to ascribe embryonic attributes to them.) 2 In this way 
the libido of our sexual instincts would coincide with the Eros of 
the poets and philosophers which holds all living things together. 

Here then is an opportunity for looking back over the slow 
development of our libido theory. In the first instance the 
analysis of the transference neuroses forced upon our notice the 
opposition between the ‘sexual instincts’, which are directed 
towards an object, and certain other instincts, with which we 
were very insufficiently acquainted and which we described 

1 Schopenhauer (1851; Sdmtlicke Werke, ed. Hiibscher, 1938, 5, 236). 

2 [This sentence was added in 1921.] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 45 

provisionally as the ‘ego-instincts ’. 1 A foremost place among 
these was necessarily given to the instincts serving the self- 
preservation of the individual. It was impossible to say what 
other distinctions were to be drawn among them. No know- 
ledge would have been more valuable as a foundation for 
true psychological science than an approximate grasp of the 
common characteristics and possible distinctive features of the 
instincts. But in no region of psychology were we groping more 
in the dark. Everyone assumed the existence of as many instincts 
or ‘basic instincts* as he chose, and juggled with them like the 
ancient Greek natural philosophers with their four elements — 
earth, air, fire and water. Psycho-analysis, which could not 
escape making some assumption about the instincts, kept at first 
to the popular division of instincts typified in the phrase ‘hunger 
arid love*. At least there was nothing arbitrary in this; and by 
its help the analysis of the psychoneuroses was carried forward 
quite a distance. The concept of ‘sexuality’, and at the same 
time of the sexual instinct, had, it is true, to be extended so as 
to cover many things which could not be classed under the 
reproductive function; and this caused no little hubbub in an 
austere, respectable or merely hypocritical world. 

The next step was taken when psycho-analysis felt its way 
closer towards the psychological ego, which it had first come to 
know only as a repressive, censoring agency, capable of erecting 
protective structures and reactive formations. Critical and far- 
seeing minds had, it is true, long since objected to the concept 
of libido being restricted to the energy of the sexual instincts 
directed towards an object. But they failed to explain how they 
had arrived at their better knowledge or to derive from it 
anything of which analysis could make use. Advancing more 
cautiously, psycho-analysis observed the regularity with which 
libido is withdrawn from the object and directed on to the ego 
(the process of introversion); and, by studying the libidinal 
development of children in its earliest phases, came to the con- 
clusion that the ego is the true and Original reservoir of libido,* 

1 [So, for instance, in the account of this opposition given in Freud's 
paper on psychogenic disturbances of vision (1910*).] 

* [This idea was fully stated by Freud in his paper on narcissism 
(1914c), Section I. See, however, his later footnote, near the beginning 
of Chapter III of The Ego and the Id (1923Z>), in which he corrects this 
statement and describes the id as ‘the great reservoir of libido’.] 



46 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


and that it is only from that reservoir that libido is extended on 
to objects. The ego now found its position among sexual 
objects and was at once given the foremost place among them. 
Libido which was in this way lodged in the ego was described 
as ‘narcissistic ’. 1 This narcissistic libido was of course also a 
manifestation of the force of the sexual instinct in the analytical 
sense of those words, and it had necessarily to be identified with 
the ‘self-preservative instincts’ whose existence had been recog- 
nized from the first. Thus the original opposition between the 
ego-instincts and the sexual instincts proved to be inadequate. 
A portion of the ego-instincts was seen to be libidinal; sexual 
instincts — probably alongside others — operated in the ego. 
Nevertheless we are justified in saying that the old formula 
which lays it down that psychoneuroses are based on a conflict 
between ego-instincts and sexual instincts contains nothing that 
we need reject to-day. It is merely that the distinction between 
the two kinds of instinct, which was originally regarded as in 
some sort of way qualitative , must now be characterized differ- 
ently— namely as being topographical And in particular it is still 
true that the transference neuroses, the essential subject of 
psycho-analytic study, are the result of a conflict between the 
ego and the libidinal cathexis of objects. 

But it is all the more necessary for us to lay stress upon the 
libidinal character of the self-preservative instincts now that we 
are venturing upon the further step of recognizing the sexual 
instinct as Eros, the preserver of all things, and of deriving the 
narcissistic libido of the ego from the stores of libido by means 
of which the cells of the soma are attached to one another. But 
we now find ourselves suddenly faced by another question. If 
the self-preservative instincts too are of a libidinal nature, are 
there perhaps no other instincts whatever but the libidinal ones? 
At all events there are none other visible. But in that case we 
shall after all be driven to agree with the critics who suspected 
from the first that psycho-analysis explains everything by sexuality, 
or with innovators like Jung who, making a hasty judgement, 
have used the word ‘libido’ to mean instinctual force in general. 
Must not this be so? 

It was not our intention at all events to produce such a result. 
Our argument had as its point of departure a sharp distinction 
between ego-instincts, which we equated with death instincts, 

1 See my paper on narcissism (1914c) [Section I]. 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 47 

and sexual instincts, which we equated with life instincts. (We 
were prepared at one stage [p. 33] to include the so-called self- 
preservative instincts of the ego among the death instincts; but 
we subsequently [p. 46] corrected ourselves on this point and 
withdrew it.) Our views have from the very first been dualistic, 
and to-day they are even more definitely dualistic than before — 
now that we describe the opposition as being, not between ego- 
instincts and sexual instincts but between life instincts and 
death instincts. Jung’s libido theory is on the contrary monistic ; 
the fact that he has called his one instinctual force "libido’ is 
bound to cause confusion, but need not affect us otherwise. 1 We 
suspect that instincts other than those of self-preservation oper- 
ate in the ego, and it ought to be possible for us to point to them. 
Unfortunately, however, the analysis of the ego has made so little 
headway that it is very difficult for us to do so. It is possible, in- 
deed, that the libidinal instincts in the ego may be linked in a 
peculiar manner 2 with these other ego-instincts which are still 
strange to us. Even before we had any clear understanding of 
narcissism, psycho-analysts had a suspicion that the ‘ego-in- 
stincts’ had libidinal components attached to them. But these are 
very uncertain possibilities, to which our opponents will pay very 
litde attention. The difficulty remains that psycho-analysis has 
not enabled us hitherto to point to any [ego-] instincts other than 
the libidinal ones. That, however, is no reason for our falling in 
with the conclusion that no others in fact exist. 

In the obscurity that reigns at present in the theory of the 
instincts, it would be unwise to reject any idea that promises to 
throw light on it. We started out from the great opposition 
between the life and death instincts. Now object-love itself 
presents us with a second example of a similar polarity — that 
between love (or affection) and hate (or aggressiveness). If only 
we could succeed in relating these two polarities to each other 
and in deriving one from the other! From the very first we 
recognized the presence of a sadistic component in the sexual 
instinct. 3 As we know, it can make itself independent and can, 
in the form of a perversion, dominate an individual’s entire 

1 [The two preceding sentences were added in 1921.] 

* [In the first edition only: * — by instinctual “confluence”, to borrow 
a term used by Adler [1908] — *.] 

* This was already so in the first edition of Three Essays on the Theory 

of Sexuality in 1905 [Standard Ed., 7, 157 ff.; 57, 23 ff.]. 



48 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

sexual activity. It also emerges as a predominant component 
instinct in one of the ‘pregenital organizations’, as I have 
named them. But how can the sadistic instinct, whose aim it is 
to injure the object, be derived from Eros, the preserver of life? 
Is it not plausible to suppose that this sadism is in fact a death 
instinct which, under the influence of the narcissistic libido, has 
been forced away from the ego and has consequently only 
emerged in relation to the object? It now enters the service of 
the sexual function. During the oral stage of organization of the 
libido, the act of obtaining erotic mastery over an object coin- 
cides with that object’s destruction; later, the sadistic instinct 
separates off, and finally, at the stage of genital primacy, it takes 
on, for the purposes of reproduction, the function of overpower- 
ing the sexual object to the extent necessary for carrying out the 
sexual act. It might indeed be said that the sadism which has 
been forced out of the ego has pointed the way for the libidinal 
components of the sexual instinct, and that these follow after it 
to the object. Wherever the original sadism has undergone no 
mitigation or intermixture, we find the familiar ambivalence of 
love and hate in erotic life . 1 

If such an assumption as this is permissible, then we have met 
the demand that we should produce an example of a death 
instinct — though, it is true, a displaced one. But this way of 
looking at things is very far from being easy to grasp and creates 
a positively mystical impression. It looks suspiciously as though 
we were trying to find a way out of a highly embarrassing situa- 
tion at any price. We may recall, however, that there is nothing 
new in an assumption of this kind. We put one forward on an 
earlier occasion, before there was any question of an embarrass- 
ing situation. Clinical observations led us at that time to the 
view that masochism, the component instinct which is comple- 
mentary to sadism, must be regarded as sadism that has been 
turned round upon the subject’s own ego . 2 But there is no 
difference in principle between an instinct turning from an 
object to the ego and its turning from the ego to an object — 
which is the new point now under discussion. Masochism, the 
turning round of the instinct upon the subject’s own ego, would 

1 [This foreshadows Freud’s discussion of instinctual ‘fusion* in 
Chap. IV of The Ego and the Id (19236).] 

2 See my Three Essays (1905<f) [. Standard Ed. f 7, 158; IP.L. y 57, 24]; 
and ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915r). 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


49 


in that case be a return to an earlier phase of the instinct’s 
history, a regression. The account that was formerly given of 
masochism requires emendation as being too sweeping in one 
respect: there might be such a thing as primary masochism — 
a possibility which I had contested at that time. 1 * * * * VI 

Let us, however, return to the self-preservative sexual in- 
stincts. The experiments upon protista have already shown us 
that conjugation — that is, the coalescence of two individuals 
which separate soon afterwards without any subsequent cell- 
division occurring — has a strengthening and rejuvenating effect 
upon both of them. 3 In later generations they show no signs 
of degenerating and seem able to put up a longer resistance 
to the injurious effects of their own metabolism. This single 
observation may, I think, be taken as typical of the effect pro- 
duced by sexual union as well. But how is it that the coalescence 
of two only slightly different cells can bring about this renewal 
of life? The experiment which replaces the conjugation of pro- 
tozoa by the application of chemical or even of mechanical 
stimuli (cf. Lipschtitz, 1914) enables us to give what is no doubt 
a conclusive reply to this question. The result is brought about 
by the influx of fresh amounts of stimulus. This tallies well with 
the hypothesis that the life process of the individual leads for 
internal reasons to an abolition of chemical tensions, that is to 
say, to death, whereas union with the living substance of a 
different individual increases those tensions, introducing what 
may be described as fresh ‘vital differences’ which must then 
be lived off. As regards this dissimilarity there must of course 
be one or more optima. The dominating tendency of mental 
life, and perhaps of nervous life in general, is the effort to 
reduce, to keep constant or to remove internal tension due to 

1 A considerable portion of these speculations have been anticipated 

by Sabina Spielrein (1912) in an instructive and interesting paper 

which, however, is unfortunately not entirely clear to me. She there 

describes the sadistic components of the sexual instinct as ‘destructive*. 
A. Starke (1914), again, has attempted to identify the concept of libido 
itself with the biological concept (assumed on theoretical grounds) of an 
impetus towards death. See also Rank (1907). All these discussions, like 

that in the text, give evidence of the demand for a clarification of the 
theory of the instincts such as has not yet been achieved. — [A later 
discussion of the destructive instinct by Freud himself occupies Chapter 

VI of Civilization and its Discontents (1930a).] 

* See the account quoted above, pp. 41-2, from Lipschiitz (1914). 



50 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

stimuli (the ‘Nirvana principle’, to borrow a term from Barbara 
Low [1920, 73]) — a tendency which finds expression in the 
pleasure principle; 1 and our recognition of that fact is one of 
our strongest reasons for believing in the existence of death 
instincts. 

But we still feel our line of thought appreciably hampered by 
the fact that we cannot ascribe to the sexual instinct the char- 
acteristic of a compulsion to repeat which first put us on the 
track of the death instincts. The sphere of embryonic develop- 
mental processes is no doubt extremely rich in such phenomena 
of repetition; the two germ-cells that are involved in sexual 
reproduction and their life history are themselves only repeti- 
tions of the beginnings of organic life. But the essence of the 
processes to which sexual life is directed is the coalescence of 
two cell-bodies. That alone is what guarantees the immortality 
of the living substance in the higher organisms. 

In other words, we need more information on the origin of 
sexual reproduction and of the sexual instincts in general. This 
is a problem which is calculated to daunt an outsider and 
which the specialists themselves have not yet been able to solve. 
We shall therefore give only the briefest summary of what- 
ever seems relevant to our line of thought from among the many 
discordant assertions and opinions. 

One of these views deprives the problem of reproduction of 
its mysterious fascination by representing it as a part manifesta- 
tion of growth. (Cf. multiplication by fission, sprouting or 
gemmation.) The origin of reproduction by sexually differenti- 
ated germ-cells might be pictured along sober Darwinian lines 
by supposing that the advantage of amphimixis, arrived at on 
some occasion by the chance conjugation of two protista, was 
retained and further exploited in later development.® On this 
view ‘sex’ would not be anything very ancient; and the extra- 
ordinarily violent instincts whose aim it is to bring about 

1 [Cf. p. 1 ff. The whole topic is further considered in ‘The Eco- 
nomic Problem of Masochism’ (1924c).] 

* Though Weismann (1892) denies this advantage as well: ‘In no case 
does fertilization correspond to a rejuvenescence or renewal of life, nor 
is its occurrence necessary in order that life may endure: it is merely an 
arrangement which renders possible the intermingling of two different 
hereditary tendencies.’ [English translation, 1893, 231.] He neverthe- 
less believes that an intermingling of this kind leads to an increase in 
the variability of the organism concerned. 



51 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

sexual union would be repeating something that had once 
occurred by chance and had since become established as 
being advantageous. 

The question arises here, as in the case of death [p. 43], whether 
we do right in ascribing to protista those characteristics alone 
which they actually exhibit, and whether it is correct to assume 
that forces and processes which become visible only in the 
higher organisms originated in those organisms for the first 
time. The view of sexuality we have just mentioned is of little 
help for our purposes. The objection may be raised against it 
that it postulates the existence of life instincts already operating 
in the simplest organisms; for otherwise conjugation, which 
works counter to the course of life and makes the task of ceasing 
to live more difficult, would not be retained and elaborated but 
would be avoided. If, therefore, we are not to abandon the 
hypothesis of death instincts, we must suppose them to be 
associated from the very first with life instincts. Rut it must be 
admitted that in that case we shall be working upon an equation 
with two unknown quantities. 

Apart from this, science has so little to tell us about the 
origin of sexuality that we can liken the problem to a dark- 
ness into which not so much as a ray of a hypothesis has pene- 
trated. In quite a different region, it is true, we do meet 
with such a hypothesis; but it is of so fantastic a kind — a 
myth rather than a scientific explanation — that I should not 
venture to produce it here, were it not that it fulfils precisely 
the one condition whose 5 fulfilment we desire. For it traces 
the origin of an instinct to a need to restore an earlier state of 
things . 

What I have in mind is, of course, the theory which Plato 
put into the mouth of Aristophanes in the Symposium , and which 
deals not only with the origin of the sexual instinct but also with 
the most important of its variations in relation to its object. 
‘The original human nature was not like the present, but 
different. In the first place, the sexes were originally three in 
number, not two as they are now; there was man; woman, and 
the union of the two. . . Everything about these primaeval 
men was double: they had four hands and four feet, two faces, 
two privy parts, and so on. Eventually Zeus decided to cut 
these men in two, ‘like a sorb-apple which is halved for pick- 
ling*. After the division had been made, ‘the two parts of man. 



52 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

each desiring his other half, came together, and threw their 
arms about one another eager to grow into one ’. 1 

Shall we follow the hint given us by the poet-philosopher, and 
venture upon the hypothesis that living substance at the time 
of its coming to life was torn apart into small particles, which 
have ever since endeavoured to reunite through the sexual in- 
stincts? that these instincts, in which the chemical affinity of 
inanimate matter persisted, gradually succeeded, as they de- 
veloped through the kingdom of the protista, in overcoming the 
difficulties put in the way of that endeavour by an environment 
charged with dangerous stimuli — stimuli which compelled them 
to form a protective cortical layer? that these splintered frag- 
ments of living substance in this way attained a multicellular 
condition and finally transferred the instinct for reuniting, in the 
most highly concentrated form, to the germ-cells? — But here, 
I think, the moment has come for breaking off. 

1 CJowett’s translation. Footnote added 1921 :] I have to thank Professor 
Heinrich Gomperz, of Vienna, for the following discussion on the origin 
of the Platonic myth, which I give partly in his own words. It is to be 
remarked that what is essentially the same theory is already to be found 
in the Upanishads. For we find the following passage in the Brihaddran - 
yaka-upanishad, 1, 4, 3 [Max-Miiller’s translation, 2, 85 f.], where the 
origin of the world from the Atman (the Self or Ego) is described: ‘But 
he felt no delight. Therefore a man who is lonely feels no delight. He 
wished for a second. He was so large as man and wife together. He then 
made this his Self to fall in two, and then arose husband and wife. 
Therefore Yagfiavalkya saidr ^We two are thus (each of us) like half a 
shell.” Therefore the void which was there, is filled by the wife/ 

The Brihaddranyaka-upanishad is the most ancient of all the Upanishads, 
and no competent authority dates it later than about the year 800 B.c. 
In contradiction to the prevailing opinion, I should hesitate to give an 
unqualified denial to the possibility of Plato’s myth being derived, even 
if it were only indirecdy, from the Indian source, since a similar possi- 
bility cannot be excluded in the case of the doctrine of transmigration. 
But even if a derivation of this kind (through the Pythagoreans in the 
first instance) were established, the significance of the coincidence be- 
tween the two trains of thought would scarcely be diminished. For Plato 
would not have adopted a story of this kind which had somehow reached 
him through some oriental tradition — to say nothing of giving it so impor- 
tant a place — unless it had struck him as containing an element of truth. 

In a paper devoted to a systematic examination of this line of thought 
before the time of Plato, Ziegler (1913) traces it back to Babylonian 
origins. 

[Freud had already alluded to Plato’s myth in his Three Essays , 
Standard Ed. y 7, 136; I.P.L., 57, 2.] 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


53 


Not, however, without the addition of a few words of critical 
reflection. It may be asked whether and how far I am myself 
convinced of the truth of the hypotheses that have been set out 
in these pages. My answer would be that I am not convinced 
myself and that I do not seek to persuade other people to believe 
in them. Or, more precisely, that I do not know how far I 
believe in them. There is no reason, as it seems to me, why the 
emotional factor of conviction should enter into this question 
at all. It is surely possible to throw oneself into a line of thought 
and to follow it wherever it leads out of simple scientific curiosity, 
or, if the reader prefers, as an advocatus diaboli , who is not on 
that account himself sold to the devil. I do not dispute the fact 
that the third step in the theory of the instincts, which I have 
taken here, cannot lay claim to the same degree of certainty as 
the two earlier ones — the extension of the concept of sexuality 
and the hypothesis of narcissism. These two innovations were a 
direct translation of observation into theory and were no more 
open to sources of error than is inevitable in all such cases. It is 
true that my assertion of the regressive character of instincts 
also rests upon observed material — namely on the facts of the 
compulsion to repeat. It may be, however, that I have over- 
estimated their significance. And in any case it is impossible to 
pursue an idea of this kind except by repeatedly combining 
factual material with what is purely speculative and thus diverg- 
ing widely from empirical observation. The more frequently 
this is done in the course of constructing a theory, the more 
untrustworthy, as we know, must be the final result. But the 
degree of uncertainty is not assignable. One may have made 
a lucky hit or one may have gone shamefully astray. I do not 
think a large part is played by what is called ‘intuition’ in work 
of this kind. From what I have seen of intuition, it seems to 
me to be the product of a kind of intellectual impartiality. 
Unfortunately, however, people are seldom Impartial where 
ultimate things, the great problems of science and life, are con- 
cerned. Each of us is governed in such cases by deep-rooted 
internal prejudices, into whose hands our speculation unwit- 
tingly plays. Since we have such good grounds for being distrust- 
ful, our attitude towards the results of our own deliberations 
cannot well be other than one of cool benevolence. I hasten to 
add, however, that self-criticism such as this is far from binding 
one to any special tolerance towards dissentient opinions. It is 



54 BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

perfectly legitimate to reject remorselessly theories which are 
contradicted by the very first steps in the analysis of observed 
facts, while yet being aware at the same time that the validity 
of one’s own theory is only a provisional one. 

We need not feel greatly disturbed in judging our speculation 
upon the life and death instincts by the fact that so many 
bewildering and obscure processes occur in it — such as one 
instinct being driven out by another or an instinct turning from 
the ego to an object, and so on. This is merely due to our being 
obliged to operate with the scientific terms, that is to say with 
the figurative language, peculiar to psychology (or, more pre- 
cisely, to depth psychology). We could not otherwise describe 
the processes in question at all, and indeed we could not have 
become aware of them. The deficiencies in our description 
would probably vanish if we were already in a position to 
replace the psychological terms by physiological or chemical 
ones. It is true that they too are only part of a figurative 
language; but it is one with which we have long been familiar 
and which is perhaps a simpler one as well. 

On the other hand it should be made quite clear that the 
uncertainty of our speculation has been greatly increased by 
the necessity for borrowing from the science of biology. Biology 
is truly a land of unlimited possibilities. We may expect it to 
give us the most surprising information and we cannot guess 
what answers it will return in a few dozen years to the questions 
we have put to it. They may be of a kind which will blow away 
the whole of our artificial structure of hypotheses. If so, it may 
be asked why I have embarked upon such a line of thought as 
the present one, and in particular why I have decided to make 
it public. Well — I cannot deny that some of the analogies, 
correlations and connections which it contains seemed to me to 
deserve consideration . 1 

1 1 will add a few words to clarify our terminology, which has under- 
gone some development in the course of the present work. We came to 
know what the ‘sexual instincts’ were from their relation to the sexes 
and to the reproductive function. We retained this name after we had 
been obliged by the findings of psycho-analysis to connect them less 
closely with reproduction. With the hypothesis of narcissistic libido and 
the extension of the concept of libido to the individual cells, the sexual 
instinct was transformed for us into Eros, which seeks to force together 
and hold together the portions of living substance. What are commonly 
called the sexual instincts are looked upon by us as the part of Eros 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 


55 


which is directed towards objects. Our speculations have suggested that 
Eros operates from the beginning of life and appears as a ‘life instinct* 
in opposition to the ‘death instinct* which was brought into being by 
the coining to life of inorganic substance. These speculations seek to 
solve the riddle of life by supposing that these two instincts were strug- 
gling with each other from the very first. [ Added 1921 :] It is not so easy, 
perhaps, to follow the transformations through which the concept of the 
‘ego-instincts* has passed. To begin with we applied that name to all 
the instinctual trends (of which we had no closer knowledge) which 
could be distinguished from the sexual instincts directed towards an 
object; and we opposed the ego-instincts to the sexual instincts of which 
the libido is the manifestation. Subsequently we came to closer grips 
with the analysis of the ego and recognized that a portion of the ‘ego- 
instincts* is also of a llbidinal character and has taken the subject’s own 
ego as its object. These narcissistic self-preservative instincts had thence- 
forward to be counted among the libidinal sexual instincts. The oppo- 
sition between the ego-instincts and the sexual instincts was transformed 
into one between the ego-instincts and the object-instincts, both of a 
libidinal nature. But in its place a fresh opposition appeared between the 
libidinal (ego- and object-) instincts and others, which must be presumed 
to be present in the ego and which may perhaps actually be observed 
in the destructive instincts. Our speculations have transformed this 
opposition into one between the life instincts (Eros) and the death 
instincts. 

[ For a general account of the development of Freud’s views on the 
instincts, see the Editor’s Note to ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes* 
(1915 c), Standard Ed., 14, 111.] 



VII 


If it is really the case that seeking to restore an earlier state of 
things is such a universal characteristic of instincts, we need not 
be surprised that so many processes take place in mental life 
independently of the pleasure principle. This characteristic 
would be shared by all the component instincts and in their 
case would aim at returning once more to a particular stage in 
the course of development. These are matters over which the 
pleasure principle has as yet no control; but it does not follow 
that any of them are necessarily opposed to it, and we have still 
to solve the problem of the relation of the instinctual processes 
of repetition to the dominance of the pleasure principle. 

We have found that one of the earliest and most important 
functions of the mental apparatus is to bind the instinctual 
impulses which impinge on it, to replace the primary pro- 
cess prevailing in them by the secondary process and convert 
their freely mobile cathectic energy into a mainly quiescent 
(tonic) cathexis. While this transformation is taking place no 
attention can be paid to the development of unpleasure; but 
this does not imply the suspension of the pleasure principle. 
On the contrary, the transformation occurs on behalf of the 
pleasure principle; the binding is a preparatory act which 
introduces and assures the dominance of the pleasure principle. 

Let us make a sharper distinction than we have hitherto 
made between function and tendency. The pleasure principle, 
then, is a tendency operating in the service of a function whose 
business it is to free the mental apparatus entirely from excita- 
tion or to keep the amount of excitation in it constant or to 
keep it as low as possible. We cannot yet decide with certainty 
in favour of any of these ways of putting it; but it is clear that 
the function thus described would be concerned with the most 
universal endeavour of all living substance — namely to return 
to the quiescence of the inorganic world. We have all experi- 
enced how the greatest pleasure attainable by us, that of the 
sexual act, is associated with a momentary extinction of a highly 
intensified excitation. The binding of an instinctual impulse 
would be a preliminary function designed to prepare the excitar 
tion for its final elimination in the pleasure of discharge. 

56 



57 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

This raises the question of whether feelings of pleasure and 
unpleasure can be produced equally from bound and from 
unbound excitatory processes. And there seems to be no doubt 
whatever that the unbound or primary processes give rise to far 
more intense feelings in both directions than the bound or 
secondary ones. Moreover the primary processes are the earlier 
in time; at the beginning of mental life there are no others, and 
we may infer that if the pleasure principle had not already been 
operative in them it could never have been established for the 
later ones. We thus reach what is at bottom no very simple 
conclusion, namely that at the beginning of mental life the 
struggle for pleasure was far more intense than later but not so 
unrestricted: it had to submit to frequent interruptions. In later 
times the dominance of the pleasure principle is very much 
more secure, but it itself has no more escaped the process of 
taming than the other instincts in general. In any case, what- 
ever it is that causes the appearance of feelings of pleasure and 
unpleasure in processes of excitation must be present in the 
secondary process just as it is in the primary one. 

Here might be the starting-point for fresh investigations. Our 
consciousness communicates to us feelings from within not only 
of pleasure and unpleasure but also of a peculiar tension which 
in its turn can be either pleasurable or unpleasurable. Should 
the difference between these feelings enable us to distinguish 
between bound and 'unbound processes of energy? or is the 
feeling of tension to be related to the absolute magnitude, or 
perhaps to the level, of the cathexis, while the pleasure and 
unpleasure series indicates a change in the magnitude of the 
cathexis within a given unit of time ? 1 Another striking fact is that 
the life instincts have so much more contact with our internal 
perception — emerging as breakers of the peace and constantly 
producing tensions whose release is felt as pleasure — while the 
death instincts seem to do their work unobtrusively. The 
pleasure principle seems actually to serve the death instincts. 
It is true that it keeps watch upon stimuli from without, which 
are regarded as dangers by both kinds of instincts; but it is 
more especially on guard against increases of stimulation from 
within, which would make the task of living more difficult. 
This in turn raises a host of other questions to which we can at 

1 [Cf. above, p. 2. These questions had already been touched on by 
Freud in his ‘Project*, e.g. in Part I, Section 8 and Part III, Section 1.] 



58 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 

present find no answer. We must be patient and await fresh 
methods and occasions of research. We must be ready, too, to 
abandon a path that we have followed for a time, if it seems to 
be leading to no good end. Only believers, who demand that 
science shall be a substitute for the catechism they have given 
up, will blame an investigator for developing or even trans- 
forming his views. We may take comfort, too, for the slow 
advances of our scientific knowledge in the words of the poet: 

Was man nicht erfliegen kann, muss man erhinken. 

m m • m m 

Die Schrift sagt, es ist keine Siinde zu hinken. 1 


1 [‘What we cannot reach flying we must reach limping. . . . The 
Book tells us it is no sin to limp.* The last lines of ‘Die beiden Gulden’, 
a version by Riickert of one of the Maqdmdt of al-Hariri. Freud also 
quoted these lines in a letter to Fliess of Oct. 20, 1895 (Freud 1950a 
Letter 32).] 



LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


cs. 

G.W. 


C.P. 

S.E. 

Standard Ed.. 
I.P.L. 


= Freud, Gesammelte Schriften (12 vols.), Vienna, 1924-34- 
= Freud, Gesammelte Werke (18 vols), London, from 1940. 
=s Freud, Collected Papers (5 vols.), London, 1924-50. 

s=s Freud, Standard Edition (24 vols.), London, from 1953. 

= International Psycho-Analytical Library , Hogarth Press and 
Institute of Psycho-Analysis, London, from 1921. 


Theoretische Sckriften = Freud, Theoretische Schriften ( 1911 - 25 ), Vienna, 


1931. 


59 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND AUTHOR INDEX 

[Titles of books and periodicals are in italics; tides of papers are in 
inverted commas. Abbreviations are in accordance with the World List 
of Scientific Periodicals (London, 1952). Further abbreviations used in this 
volume will be found in the List on page 59. Numerals in thick type 
refer to volumes; ordinary numerals refer to pages. The figures in round 
brackets at the end of each entry indicate the page or pages of this 
volume on which the work in question is mentioned. In the case of the 
Freud entries, the letters attached to the dates of publication are in 
accordance with the corresponding entries in the complete bibliography 
of Freud’s writings to be included in the last volume of the Standard 
Edition. 

For non-technical authors, and for technical authors where no 
specific work is mentioned, see the General Index.] 

Adler, A. ( 1 908) ‘Der Aggressionsbetrieb im Leben und in der Neurose’, 
Fortscksr . Med., No. 19, (47) 

Breuer, J., and Freud, S. (1893) See Freud, S. (1893a) 

(1895) See Freud, S. (1895</) 

(1940) See Freud, S. {imd) 

Doflein, F. (1919) Das Problem des Todes und der Unsterblichkeit bet den 
Pflanzen und Tieren, Jena. (41) 

Fechner, G. T. (1873) Einige Idem zur Schopfungs- und Entwicklungs - 
geschichte der Organismen , Leipzig. (2, 4) 

Ferenczi, S. (1913) ‘Entwiqklungsstufen des Wirklichkeitssiimes’, bit. 
Psychoanal., 1, 124. (35) 

[Trans.: ‘Stages in the Development of the Sense of Reality’, 
First Contributions to Psycho-Analysis , London, 1952, Chap, VIII.] 
Fltess, W. (1906) Der Ablauf des Lebens , Vienna. (39) 

Freud, S. (1893a) With Breuer, J., ‘t)ber den psychischen Mechanismus 
hysterischer Phanomene: Vorlaufige Mitteilung’, G.S., 1, 7; 
G.W., 1, 81. (7) 

[Trans.; ‘On the Psychical Mechanism of Hysterical Pheno- 
mena: Preliminary Communication’, C.P., 1, 24; Standard Ed., 
2, 3.] 

(1895d) With Breuer, J., Studien uber Hysteric, Vienna, G.S., 1; 
G.W., 1, 75. Omitting Breuer’s contributions. (3, 19, 21, 28) 
[Trans.: Studies on Hysteria , Standard Ed., 2; I.P.L., 50, Including 
Breuer’s contributions.] 

(1900a) Die Traumdeutung, Vienna, G.S., 2-3; G.W., 2-3. (x, 8-9, 
18-19, 26, 28) 

[Trans.: The Interpretation of Dreams, London and New York, 
1 955 ; Standard Ed., 4-5.] 


60 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


61 


Freud, S. ( coni .) 

(1905c) Der Witz and seine Beziehung zum Unbewussten, Vienna. G.S., 

9, 5; G.W., 6. (29) 

[Trans.: Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious , London, 1960; 
Standard Ed 8.] 

(1905<f) Drei Abhandiungen zur Sexualtheorie, Vienna. G.S., 5, 3; G.W., 
5, 29. (27, 47-8, 52) 

[Trarw..* Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality , London, 1949; 
Standard Ed., 7, 125; I.P.L . , 57.] 

(1910:) ‘Die psychogene Sehstorung in psychoanalytischer Au£* 
fassung’, G.S., 5, 301; G.W., 8, 94. (45) 

[Trans.: ‘The Psycho-Analytic View of Psychogenic Disturbance 
of Vision’, C.P. , 2, 105; Standard Ed., 11, 211.] 

(19116) 4 Formulierungen liber die zwei Prinzipien des psychischen 
Geschehen s’, G.S. , 5, 409; G.W., 8, 230. (xi, 4) 

[Trans.: ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of Mental Func- 
tioning’, C.P., 4, 13; Standard Ed., 12, 215.] 

(1914c) ‘Zur Einfiihrung des Narzissmus’, G.S., 6, 155; G.W., 10, 
138. (xii, 27, 45-6) . 

[Trans.: ‘On Narcissism: an Introduction*, C.P., 4, 30; Standard 
Ed., 14, 69.] 

(1914^) ‘Weitere Ratschl£ge zur Technik der Psychoanalyse: II 
Erinnem, Wiederholen und Durcharbeiten’, G.S., 6, 109; G.W., 

10, 126. (12) 

[Trans.: ‘Recollecting, Repeating and Working Through 
(Further Recommendations on the Technique of Psycho- 
Analysis, II)’, C.P., 2, 366; Standard Ed., 12, 147.] 

(1915c) ‘Triebe und Triebschicksale’, G.S., 5, 443; G.W., 10, 210. 
(xii, 24, 48, 55) 

[Trans.: ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’, C.P., 4, 60; Standard 
Ed., 14, 111.] 

(1915c) ‘Das Unbewusste*, G.S., 5, 480; G.W. , 10, 264. (1, 18, 

22 ) 

[Trans.: ‘The Unconscious’, C.P., 4, 98; Standard Ed., 14, 161.] 
(1916-17) Vorlesungen zur Einfiihnmg in die Psychoanalyse, Vienna. 
G.S., 7; G.W., 11. (14) 

[Trans.: Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, revised ed., Lon-, 
don, 1929 (A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis, New York, 
1935); Standard Ed., 15-16.] 

(19176) ‘Eine Kindheitserinnerung aus Dichtung und Wahrheit\ 
G.S., 10, 357; G.W., 12, 15. (10) 

[Trans.: ‘A Childhood Recollection from Dichtung und Wahrkeit 
C.P., 4, 357; Standard Ed., 17, 147.] 

(191 7<f ) ‘Metapsychologische Erganzung zur Traumlehre’, G.S., 5, 
520 ;G.W., 10,412. (18,24) ' 

[Trans.: ‘A Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory of 
Dreams’, C.P., 4, 137; Standard Ed., 15, 219.] 

(1919d) Einleitung zu Zur Psychoanalyse der Kriegsneurosen , Vienna. 
G.S., 11, 252; G.W., 12, 321. (6, 27) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Freud, S. (cont.) 

[Trans.: Introduction to Psycho-Analysis and the War Neuroses, 
London and New York, 1921. G.P., 5, 83; Standard Ed., 17, 207.] 
(1919A) ‘Das Unheimliche’, G.S., 10, 369; G.W., 12, 229. (ix-x) 
f Trans.: ‘The Uncanny*, CP., 4, 368; Standard Ed., 17, 219.] 
(1920/) ‘Erganzungen zur Traumlehre* (Abstract of Congress 
Address), Int. Z- Psychoan ., 6, 397. 

[Trans.: ‘Supplements to the Theory of Dreams*, Standard Ed., 
18, 4; I.P.L., 4, x.] 

(1920g) Jenseits des Lustprinzips, Vienna. G.S., 6, 191; G.W., 13, 3. 
[Trans.: Beyond the Pleasure Principle , Standard Ed., 18, 7; 

I. P.L., 4.] 

(19216) Introduction in English to J. Varendonck’s The Psycho- 
logy of Day-Dreams, London; Standard Ed., 18, 271. (xi) 

[German Text (part only): G.S., 11, 264; G.W., 13, 439.] 

(19236) Das Ick und das Es, Vienna. G.S., 6, 353; G.W., 13, 237. 
(xi, 13, 45, 48) 

[Trans.: The Ego and the Id, Standard Ed., 19, 3; I.P.L., 12.] 
(1923c [1922]) ‘Bemerkungcn zur Theorie und Praxis der Traum- 
deutung*, G.S., 3, 305; G.W., 13, 301. (14, 26) 

[Trans.: ‘Remarks on the Theory and Practice of Dream- 
Interpretation*, C.P. , 5, 136; Standard Ed., 19, 109.] 

(1924c) ‘Das okonomische Problem des Masochismus*, G.S., 5, 374; 
G.W., 13,371. (2,50) 

[Trans.: ‘The Economic Problem of Masochism*, C.P., 2, 255; 
Standard Ed., 19, 157.] 

(1925a [1924]) ‘Notiz iiber den “Wunderblock" *, G.S., 6, 415; 
G.W., 14, 3. (19, 22) 

[Trans.: ‘A Note upon the “Mystic Writing-Pad** *, C.P. , 5, 175; 
Standard Ed., 19, 227.] 

(1925c [1924]) ‘Die Widerstande gegen die Psychoanalyse*, GJS., 

II, 224; G.W., 14, 99. (44) 

[Trans.: ‘The Resistance to Psycho-Analysis*, C.P., 5, 163; 
Standard Ed., 19, 213.] 

(1926d) Hemmung, Symptom und Angst , Vienna. GJS., 11, 23; G.W., 
14,113.(7,14,24) 

[Trans.: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, Standard Ed., 20, 77; 
IPX., 28.] 

(1930a) Das Unbehagen in der Kultur, Vienna. G.S., 12, 29; G.W., 
14, 421. (49) 

[Trans.: Civilization and its Discontents, London and New York, 
1930; Standard Ed., 24, 59.] — 

(1940^) With Breuer, J., ‘Zur Theorie des hysterischen Anfalls*, 
G.W., 17, 9. (3) 

[Trans.: ‘On the Theory of Hysterical Attacks*, C.P., 5, 27; 
Standard Ed., 1.] 

(1941a) Brief an Josef Breuer, G.W. , 17, 5. (3) 

[Trans.: A Letter to Josef Breuer, C.P., 5, 25; Standard Ed., 1.] 
(1942a) ‘Psychopathic Characters on the Stage*, Standard Ed., 7, 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


63 


Freud, S. (cont.) 

305. Translation of £ Psy chopathische Personen auf der Bfihne’, 
which has not been published in German. (11) 

(1950a) Aus dm Anfangm der Psychoanalyse , London. [Includes 
‘Entwurf einer Psychologic’ (1895).] (xii, 2-3, 19-20, 22-4, 
57-8) 

[Trans.: The Origins of Psycho-Analysis , London and New York, 
1954. (Partly, including ‘A Project for a Scientific Psychology’, 
in Standard Ed., 1.)] 

(1955c) ‘Gutachten fiber die eiektrische Behandlung der Kriegs- 
neurotiker’; German text unpublished. (6) 

[Trans.: ‘Memorandum on the Electrical Treatment of War 
Neuroses’, Standard Ed., 17, 211.] 

Freud, S., Ferenczi, S., and others. (1919) Psychoanalyse der Kriegs- 
neurosen , Vienna. (6) 

[Trans.: Psycho-Analysis and the War Neuroses , London and New 
York, 1921.] 

Goette, A. (1883) Uber den Ursprung des Todes, Hamburg. (41) 
Hartmann, M. (1906) Tod und Foripflanzung, Munich. (41) 

Jung, C. G. (1909) ‘Die Bedeutung des Vaters fur das Schicksal des 
Einzelnen’, Jb. psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch., 1, 155. (16) 
[Trans.: ‘The Significance of the Father in the Destiny of the 
Individual’, Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology , London, 1916, 
156.] 

LipschOtz, A. (1914) Warum voir sterben , Stuttgart. (41, 49) 

Low, B. (1920) Psycho-Analysis, London. (50) 

Marcinowski, J. (1918) ‘Die erotischen Qjuellen der Minderwertig- 
keitsgefuhle’, £. Sexualwiss ., 4, 313. (14) 

Pfeifer, S. (1919) ‘Ausserungen infantil-erotischer Triebe im Spiele’, 
Imago, 5, 243. (8) 

Rank, O. (1907) Der Kunstler, Vienna. (49) 

Rickman, J. (ed.) (1937) A General Selection from the Works of Sigmund 
Freud , London, (xii) 

Schopenhauer, A. (1851) £ t)ber die anscheinende Absichtlichkeit im 
Schicksale des Einzelnen’, Parerga und Paralipomena , 1 ( Samtliche 
Werke, ed. Hfibscher, Leipzig, 1938, 5, 213). (44) 

Spielrein, S. (1912) ‘Die Destruktion als Ursache des Werdens’, Jb. 

psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch., 4 , 465. (49) 

Starcke, A. (1914) Introduction to Dutch translation of Freud’s 
‘ “Civilized” Sexual Morality and Modem Nervous Illness’, 
Leyden. (49) 

Varendonck, J. (1921) The Psychology of Day-Dreams, London, (xi) 
Weismann, A. (1882) Uber die Dauer des Lebens, Jena. (39) 

(1884) Uber Leben und Tod, Jena. (39-41) 

(1892) Das Keimplasma, Jena. (39-40, 50) 

[Trans.: The Germ-Plasm , London, 1893.] 

Ziegler, K. (1913) ‘Menschen- und Weltenwerden’, Neue Jb. klass . 
Altert., 31 , 529. (52) 



GENERAL INDEX 


This index includes the names of non-technical authors. It also includes 
the names of technical authors where no reference is made in the text to 
specific works. For references to specific technical works, the Bibliography 
should be consulted. 


Abraham , K., 6nA 
Abreaction, 11 

Active and passive in children’s play, 
10-11, 29 
Aggressiveness, 47 
Al-Haririj 58 

Ambivalence and the opposition be- 
tween the life and death in- 
stincts, 47-8 
Amphimixis, 42, 50 
Analogy, Plato's myth of bisexu- 
aEty* 51-2 
Animals 

conservative nature of instinct in, 
29-34, 36 
death of, 39-43 
duration of life in, 39-44 
Anticathexis, 24 

Anxiety {see also Fear; Fright; 
Phobias) 
defined, 6-7 

preparedness for, 7 a. 1, 25-7 
Anxiety dreams, x, 7, 26 
Aristophanes, 51-2 
Art, 11 

Atman (in the Upanishads ), 52 n. 1 
* Autistic thinking', xi 

Beiden Gulden, Die , 58 
Biological 

concept of death, 39-43, 49 n. 1 
factors, 54 
Bisexuality, 51-2 

‘Bound' psychical energy {see 
Energy, psychical, bound and 
unbound) 

Brain, anatomy of the, 18 
Brattt von Messina, Die,' 39 
Breuer, j. {see also Bibliography), 
20-1, 25, 28 

Calkins, G. X, 42 

Cathexis {see Excitatory processes) 

Censorship, x, 45 


Child, desire to have, by father, 15 
Childhood, traumas of, xi, 26 
Children (see also Infantile sexu- 
ality) 

compulsion to repeat in, ix, xi, 
8-11,17,29-30 
play of, 8-11, 17, 29 
sexual researches of, 15 
Clorinda (in Gerusalemme Liberata ), 16 
Component instincts, 47-9, 56 
Compulsion to repeat 
as an attribute of organic life, 
30-2, 34, 38, 50-3, 56 
during psycho-analysis, ix, xi, 12- 
17, 29-30 

in children, ix, xi, 8-11, 1 7, 29-30 
in dreams during traumatic neu- 
roses, 7, 17, 26-7 
in normal people, 15-16 
instinctual character of, ix, xi, 14- 
15, 17, 29-31, 50-3, 56 
Condensation, 28 
Confluence of instincts, 47 n , 2 
Conscience, x 

Conscious system, 18-22, 28 
Consciousness 
admissibility to, 12-13, 19 
origin of, 19-21 

Constancy, principle of {see also 
Excitatory processes), 3, 3 ru 2, 
56 

Cs. {see Conscious system) 

‘Daemonic force', 15, 29-30 
Danger, perception of, 5-6, 33, 52 
Danvisi, Charles, 50 
Day's residues, 28, 30 
Death 

aim of life is, 32-4, 38-9, 49 
biological concept of, 39-43, 
49 n. 1 

internal necessity of, 32, 38-41, 43 
‘natural*, 34, 39-43 
Weismann’s views on, 39-43 


64 



GENERAL INDEX 


65 


Death instinct {see also Ego-instincts), 
ix, 32-5, 38, 4<M, 43-51, 54 
equated with ego-instinct, 38, 46, 
54 tu 

in opposition to life instinct, xi, 
34-5, 38, 43, 47, 54 n. 

Dementia praecox, 27 
Destiny, compulsion of, 15-17 
Destructiveness, xi, 49 n. 1 
Displacement in dreams, 28 
Dream-content, manifest, 28 
Dreams 

and sleep, 26-7 
anxiety-, x, 7, 26 
as wish-fulfilments, x-xi, 7, 26-7 , 
3° 

censorship of, x, 45 
displacement in, 28 
during psycho-analysis, 15, 26 
hallucinatory character of, 26 
‘prospective* function of, x 
punishment-, x, 26 
traumatic, xi, 7, 17, 26 
Dream-thoughts, latent, xi 
Dream-work, xi, 28 

Ego 

and pleasure principle, 14, 17 
as reservoir of libido, 44-6, 48 
masochistic trends of, 7-8, 48-9 
nucleus of, 13 

repressive forces of, 13—14, 17 
unconscious part of, 13-14 
unification of, 4-5, 13, 27 
Ego ideal, x 

Ego-instincts {see also Death instinct; 
Self-preservation, instinct of), 
38, 44^7 

equated with death instinct, 38, 
46, 54 n. 

in opposition to sexual instinct, 
35, 38, 44-9, 54 n. 

Eitingon, Dr. M., ix 
Embryology, 20, 31, 50 
Energy, psychical, bound and un- 
bound, 1—2, 20-5, 27-30, 56-7 
Eros {see also Libido; Life instinct; 
Sexual instinct), xi, 36-7, 44, 
46, 48, 54 
Excitations 

external, 20-6, 34, 35 n. 3, 49-50, 
52, 57 

internal, 22-3, 28, 57 
Excitatory processes, 1, 3, 17, 30, 
56-7 


External world, 18, 20-2 

Fairy tales, 14 n. 3 
Father 

daughter’s desire for a child by, 15 
jealousy of, 10 
Faust {Goethe), 36 

Fear {see also Anxiety; Fright; 
Phobia), 6, 7 n. 

Fechner, G. T. {see also Bibliography), 
2, 4 

Ferenczi, S. {see also Bibliography), 
6 n. 1,7 

Fliess, Wilhelm (see also Bibliography), 
39, 58 n. 

Forgetting, 26 

Fright (see also Anxiety; Fear), 6-7, 

25 

Genital primacy, 48 
Gerusalemme Liberata (Tasso), 16 
Goethe, 10 n. 2, 36 
Gomperz , H., 52 n. 1 
Guilt, sense of, 26 

Hague, The, x 

Hallucinatory character of dreams, 

26 

Hereditary factors, 31 
Hering, E., 43 
Hunger, 45 
Hypochondria, 6 
Hysteria, x, 6-7 

Id, the, 45 «. 2 

Inertia, neuronic, principle of, 3 n. 
Infantile sexuality, 1 2, 14-15, 45 
Inferiority, sense of, 14—15 
Instincts (see also Component in- 
stincts; Death instinct; Ego- 
instincts; Life instinct; Self-pre- 
servation, instinct of; Sexual 
instinct), 4-5, 14-15, 28-38, 
45-7, 49 n. 1, 53-7 
‘conservatism* of, 30-5, 38 
Instinctual character of the compul- 
sion to repeat, ix, xi, 14-15, 17, 
29-31, 50-3, 56 

International Psycho-Analytical 
Congress, x 
Introversion, 45 

Jealousy 
of father, 10 

of younger child, 10 ru 1, 15 



66 


GENERAL INDEX 


Jokes, 29 
Jones, E., 6 n. 1 
Jovoett , B., 52 n. 1 

Jung , C. G. {see also Bibliography), 
46-7 

Kant, 22 
Libido 

ego as reservoir of, 44-6, 48 
Jung’s view of, 46-7 
Narcissistic, 46, 48, 54 n. 

Libido theory, 27, 44-8, 49 n. 1 , 54 n. 
Life 

aim of, is death, 32, 34, 38-9, 49 
duration of, 39- -4 4 
origin of, 32-3, 35, 50 
Life instinct {see also Eros; Sexual 
instinct), 34-5, 38, 43-8, 51, 54, 
57 

Loeb , J., 42 

Maqdmdt of al-Hariri , 58 n. 

Masochism, 7-8, 48-9 

Maupas, E. f 41—2 

Melancholia, 6, 27 

Memory- traces, 18-19, 30 

Mental apparatus, 3-5, 8, 18, 23-6, 

28- 9, 56 

Mephistopheles (in Faust), 36 
Migration of birds and fishes, 3 1 
Mother, child’s fear oflosing, 8-10 
Myths, 51, 52 n. 1 

Narcissism, 14, 46-8, 53-4 
and physical injury, 27 
‘of germ-cells’, 44 

Neuroses {see also Obsessional neu- 
rosis; Transference-neuroses; 
Traumatic neuroses; War neu- 
roses) 

sexual aetiology of, 33-4, 45 
theory of, 33-4, 44-5 
Neurotics 

compared to normal persons, 15- 
16 

psycho-analysis of, ix, xi, 13-16, 

29- 30 

‘Nirvana principle*, 50 

Object-choice, 44-9, 54 n. 
Object-instincts, 54 n. 

Obsessional neurosis, x 


Oedipus complex, 12, 14-15 

Oral phase, 48 

Organic 

injury, and neurosis, 6, 27 
life, and the compulsion to repeat, 

30-2, 34, 38, 53, 56 


Pain, physical, 24 
Pan-sexualism, 46 
Parental complex, 14 n. 2 
Parents and children, relation be- 
tween (see also Father; Mother; 
Oedipus complex), 14-15 
Pcpt. {see Perceptual system) 

Pcs. {see Preconscious system) 
Perceptual system, 18-19, 22 
Periodicity {Fliess*s theory of), 39 
Perversion, 47-8 
Phantasies 
unconscious, xi 
wishful, 30 

Phobias (see also Anxiety), 36 
Physical 

injury and neurosis, 6, 27 
pain, 24 
Plants, 33-4, 39 
Plato, 51-2, 52 n. 1 
Play of children, 8-1 1, 1 7, 29 
Pleasure principle 
dominance of, 1-4, 11, 14, 23-9, 
49-50, 56-7 

over-ridden by compulsion to re- 
peat, ix, 8-1 1, 14-18, 36-40, 56 
relation to principle of constancy, 
3 

Preconscious system, xi, 13, 28 
Primary process (see also Energy, 
psychical, bound and unbound), 
4, 28-9, 56-7 

Primitive peoples, superstitious be- 
liefs of, 39 
Principle 

constancy, 3, 3 n. 2, 56 
insusceptibility of uncathected 
systems, 24 n. 2 
neuronic inertia, 3 n. 2 
‘Nirvana’, 50 

pleasure (see Pleasure principle) 
reality, 4—5, 14, 29 
stability (Fechner), 2-3 
Projection, 23 

‘Prospective* function of dreams, x 
Protective shield against stimuli, 
21-6 



GENERAL 

Protista, 38—44, 49-52 
Psycho-analytic technique, 12-15 
Psycho-analytic theory, 1 
‘pan-sexualism’ of, 46 
Psycho-analytic treatment 

of neurotics, ix, xi, 13-16, 29— 

30 

termination of, 30 
therapeutic aspect of, 12-13 
Psychoneuroses (see Neuroses) 
Punishment-dreams, x, 26 
Pythagoras , 52 n. 1 

Quality, 2—3, 23, 25 
Quantity, 2, 2 n. 1, 25 

Reaction-formation, 45 
Reality-principle, 4-5, 14, 29 
Regression, masochism as, 49 
Repeat, compulsion to ( see Compul- 
sion to repeat) 

Repression 

and compulsion to repeat, 12-14, 
26,30 

and pleasure principle, 5, 14 
ego as agent of, 13-14, 17, 45 
instinctual, 5, 14, 36-7 
Resistance 
and ego, 14 

overcoming of, in psycho-analytic 
treatment, 12-14 
transference exploited by, 17 
Rskkert F., 58 n. 

Sadism, 47-8, 49 n. 1 
Schiller , F., 39 

Schopenhauer , A. ( see also Biblio- 
graphy), 44 

Secondary process (see also Energy, 
psychical, bound and unbound) 
28, 30, 56-7 

Self-preservation, instinct of (see also 
Ego-instincts), 4, 33, 45-7, 49, 
54 n. 

Sexual aetiology of the neuroses, 33- 
4, 45 

Sexual curiosity of children, 15 
Sexual excitement and mechanical 
agitation, 27 

Sexual instinct (see also Eros; Libido; 
Life instinct) 

and component instincts, 47-8, 
49 n. i, 53 

and pleasure principle, 4-5 


INDEX 67 

equated with life instinct, 34-5, 
38, 40, 44, 47, 54 n. 
in opposition to ego-instincts, 35, 
38, 44-7, 54 n. 
origin of, 50-2 
Sexual intercourse, 56 
Shock and traumatic neurosis, 25 
Simmel, E., 6 n. 1,7 
Sleep and dreams, 26-7 
Stability, principle of (Fechner), 2-3 
Stimuli, 20-6, 34, 35 n. 3, 49-50, 52, 
57 

Suggestion as a factor in psycho- 
analysis, 14 n. 2, 26 
Superstitious beliefs, 39 
Symposium , The , 51-2 

Tancred (in Gerusalemme Liber ata), 16 
Tasso, 16 

Three Wishes, The, 14 n. 3 
Time, sense of, related to Pcpt.-Cs., 
22 

Tragedy, 11 

Transference, 12, 15-17, 30 
exploited by resistance, 1 7 
Transference neuroses (see also Hys- 
teria; Obsessional Neurosis), 
12-13, 44, 46 
Transmigration, 52 n. 1 
Trauma, 6-8, 23-7 
infantile, xi, 26 
Traumatic 

dreams, x, xi, 7, 1 7, 26 
neurosis, 6-8, 1 7, 25-9 

Uncathected systems, insuscepti- 
bility to excitation of, 24 n. 2 
Unconscious 
ego, 13-14 

mental processes, 12-13, 18, 22 
systems, 28 
Unconscious, the, 28 
relation to Cs., 19, 22, 28 
timelessness of, 22 

Unpleasure, 1-5, 10-11, 14-15, 18, 
23-4, 32, 56-7 
Fechner ’s view of, 2-4 
neurotic, ‘pleasure that cannot be 
felt as such*, 5 
Upanishads, 52 n. 1 

Varendonck , J. (see also Bibliography)* 
xi 



68 GENERAL INDEX 

Waking life, relation of dreams to, Wish-fiilfilment in dreams, x-xi, 7. 

28 26-7, 30 

War of 1914-18, 6 Woodruff, L. L. } 41-2 

War neuroses, 6 

Weismann, A. ( see also Bibliography), 

39-43 Zeus, 51 



