The 

Interpretation 
of Dreams 


The Complete and Definitive Text 

Translated and Edited by James Straehey 


Praise for Sigmund Freud's 
The Interpretation of Dreams 


“Freud’s classic. Freud has been a dominant force in Western 
thinking and here’s the book that started it all.” 

— Psychology Today 

“[An] epoch-making book.” 

— The Economist 

“Today, those practicing quicker therapies and psychopharma- 
cology outnumber psychoanalysts, but Dr. Freud is indisputably 
with us, informing the very way we think about being human.” 
— Life magazine 

“Freud’s achievement was to give a name to the fears of his age.” 
— New Statesman 

“At the beginning of our century, the publication of The Inter- 
pretation of Dreams changed our everyday perception of that 
essential component of human existence.” 

— The Daily Mail 

“Sigmund Freud’s The Interpretation of Dreams sold fewer than 
400 copies in its first six years, but the fires it lit are still blazing.” 
— Brooke Gladstone, co-host and managing editor, 

NPR’s On the Media 




SIGMUND 

FREUD 

THE INTERPRETATION 
OF DREAMS 


Translated from the German and edited by 

James Strachey 


Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo 


BASIC 

B 

BOOKS 

A Member of the Perseus Books Group 
New York 



This complete and definitive text, translated and edited by James Strachey, 
was first published in the United States in 1955 by Basic Books, Inc. by 
arrangement with George Allen & Unwin Ltd. and The Hogarth Press, Ltd. 

Translation copyright © 1955 by James Strachey. 

This edition published by Basic Books in 2010. 

All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this 
book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written 
permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles 
and reviews. For information, address the Perseus Books Group, 387 Park 
Avenue South, New York, NY 10016-8810. 

Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk 
purchases in the United States by corporations, institutions, and other 
organizations. For more information, please contact the Special Markets 
Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, 
Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 255-1514, or e-mail special. markets 
@perseusbooks.com. 

Set in 1 0 point Adobe Garamond 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Freud, Sigmund, 1856-1939. 

[Traumdeutung. English] 

The interpretation of dreams / Sigmund Freud ; translated from the 
German and edited by James Strachey. 
p. cm. 

“This complete and definitive text, translated and edited by James Strachey, 
was first published in the United States in 1955 by Basic Books.” 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 978-0-465-01977-9 (alk. paper) 

1 . Dreams. 2. Psychoanalysis. I. Strachey, James. II. Title. 
BF1078.F72 2010 

154.6'3— dc22 2009034599 


10 987654321 



CONTENTS 


Editor’s Introduction xi 

Preface to the First Edition xxiii 

Preface to the Second Edition xxv 

Preface to the Third Edition xxvii 

Preface to the Fourth Edition xxviii 

Preface to the Fifth Edition xxix 

Preface to the Sixth Edition xxix 

Preface to the Eighth Edition xxxi 

Preface to the Third (Revised) 

English Edition xxxii 


Chapter 

I THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE DEALING 


WITH THE PROBLEMS OF DREAMS 35 

(a) The Relation of Dreams to Waking Life 41 

(b) The Material of Dreams — Memory in Dreams 44 

(c) The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 54 

(1) External Sensory Stimuli 55 

(2) Internal (Subjective) Sensory Excitations 62 

(3) Internal Organic Somatic Stimuli 65 

(4) Psychical Sources of Stimulation 70 

(d) Why Dreams Are Forgotten After Waking 73 

(e) The Distinguishing Psychological 

Characteristics of Dreams 77 

(f) The Moral Sense in Dreams 93 



VI 


Contents 


(g) Theories of Dreaming and Its Function 101 

(h) The Relations Between Dreams and 

Mental Diseases 113 

Postscript, 1909 118 

Postscript, 1914 120 

II THE METHOD OF INTERPRETING 

DREAMS: AN ANALYSIS OF A 
SPECIMEN DREAM 121 

III A DREAM IS THE FULFILMENT 

OF A WISH 147 

IV DISTORTION IN DREAMS 159 

V THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES 

OF DREAMS 187 

(a) Recent and Indifferent Material in Dreams 188 

(b) Infantile Material as a Source of Dreams 21 1 

(c) The Somatic Sources of Dreams 240 

(d) Typical Dreams 259 

(а) Embarrassing Dreams of Being Naked 260 

((3) Dreams of the Death of Persons of 

Whom the Dreamer Is Fond 266 

(y) Other Typical Dreams 288 

(б) Examination Dreams 29 1 

VI THE DREAM-WORK 295 

(a) The Work of Condensation 296 

(b) The Work of Displacement 322 

(c) The Means of Representation in Dreams 326 

(d) Considerations of Representability 353 

(e) Representation by Symbols in Dreams — 

Some Further Typical Dreams 363 

(f) Some Examples — Calculations and 

Speeches in Dreams 414 


(g) Absurd Dreams — Intellectual Activity in Dreams 434 



Contents vii 

(h) Affects in Dreams 466 

(i) Secondary Revision 493 

VII THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM- 

PROCESSES 513 

(a) The Forgetting of Dreams 516 

(b) Regression 535 

(c) Wish-Fulfilment 550 

(d) Arousal by Dreams — The Function of 

Dreams — Anxiety-Dreams 572 

(e) The Primary and Secondary Processes — 

Repression 585 

(f) The Unconscious and Consciousness — Reality 605 

APPENDIX A: A Premonitory Dream Fulfilled 617 

APPENDIX B: List of Writings by Freud Dealing 

Predominantly or Largely 
with Dreams 621 

ADDITIONAL NOTES 623 

BIBLIOGRAPHY (a) Author Index and 

List of Works Quoted 625 

(b) List of Works on Dreams 

Published Before 1900 647 

INDEX OF DREAMS (a) Freud’s Own Dreams 653 

(b) Other People’s Dreams 654 

GENERAL INDEX 657 




NOTE 


The present edition is a reprint of that included in Vols. IV and V of the 
Standard Edition, London, 1953 (The Hogarth Press and The Institute 
of Psycho-Analysis). A few additional notes will be found on p. 623. The 
editor is deeply indebted to Miss Anna Freud for her unfailing help and 
criticism at every stage of the work. 




EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 


(i) 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 

(a) German Editions: 

1900 Die Traumdeutung. Leipzig and Vienna: Franz Deuticke. 
Pp. iv + 375. 

1909 2nd ed. (Enlarged and revised.) Same publishers. Pp. vi + 389. 

1911 3rd ed. (Enlarged and revised.) Same publishers. Pp. x + 418. 

1914 4th ed. (Enlarged and revised.) Same publishers. Pp. x + 498. 

1919 5th ed. (Enlarged and revised.) Same publishers. Pp. ix + 474. 

1921 6th ed. 1 (Reprints of 5th ed. except for new preface and revised 

1922 7th ed. J bibliography.) Pp. vii + 478. 

1925 Vol. II and part ofVol. Ill of Freud, Gesammelte Schriften. (Enlarged 
and revised.) Leipzig, Vienna and Zurich: Internationaler Psy- 
choanalytischer Verlag. Pp. 543 and 1-185. 

1930 8th ed. (Enlarged and revised.) Leipzig and Vienna: Franz Deuticke. 
Pp. x + 435. 

1942 In Double Volume II & III of Freud, Gesammelte Werke. (Reprint 
of 8th ed.) London: Imago Publishing Co. Pp. xv and 1-642. 

( b ) English Translations: 

1913 By A. A. Brill. London: George Allen & Co.; New York: 
The Macmillan Co. Pp. xiii + 510. 

1915 2nd ed. London: George Allen & Unwin; New York: The 

Macmillan Co. Pp. xiii + 510. 

1932 3rd ed. (Completely revised and largely rewritten by various 
unspecified hands.) London: George Allen & Unwin; New 
York: The Macmillan Co. Pp. 600. 


xi 



Editor’s Introduction 


xii 

1938 In The Basic Writings of Sigmund Freud. Pp. 181-549. (Reprint of 
3rd ed. with almost the whole of Chapter _ omitted.) New 
York: Random House. 

The present, entirely new, translation is by James Strachey. 

Actually Die TraumdeutungvcaAt its first appearance in 1899. The fact 
is mentioned by Freud at the beginning of his second paper on Josef Pop- 
per ( 1 932c): ‘It was in the winter of 1899 that my book on the interpre- 
tation of dreams (though its title-page was post-dated into the new 
century) at length lay before me. But we now have more precise informa- 
tion from his correspondence with Wilhelm Fliess (Freud, 195 Oa). In his 
letter of November 5, 1899 (Letter 123), Freud announces that ‘yesterday 
at length the book appeared’; and from the preceding letter it seems that 
Freud himself had received two advance copies about a fortnight earlier, 
one of which he had sent to Fliess as a birthday present. 

The Interpretation of Dreams was one of the two books — the Three Es- 
says on the Theory of Sexuality (1905«() was the other — which Freud kept 
more or less systematically ‘up to date’ as they passed through their series 
of editions. After the third edition of the present work, the changes in it 
were not indicated in any way; and this produced a somewhat confusing 
effect on the reader of the later editions, since the new material sometimes 
implied a knowledge of modifications in Freud’s views dating from times 
long subsequent to the period at which the book was originally written. In 
an attempt to get over this difficulty, the editors of the first collected edi- 
tion of Freud’s works (the Gesammelte Schriften) reprinted the first edition 
of The Interpretation of Dreams in its original form in one volume, and put 
into a second volume all the material that had been added subsequently. 
Unfortunately, however, the work was not carried out very systematically, 
for the additions themselves were not dated and thereby much of the ad- 
vantage of the plan was sacrificed. In subsequent editions a return was 
made to the old, undifferentiated single volume. 

By far the greater number of additions dealing with any single subject 
are those concerned with symbolism in dreams. Freud explains in his ‘His- 
tory of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’ {\9\Ad), as well as at the begin- 
ning of Chapter VI, Section E (p. 363), of the present work, that he arrived 
late at a full realization of the importance of this side of the subject. In the 
first edition, the discussion of symbolism was limited to a few pages and a 
single specimen dream (giving instances of sexual symbolism) at the end of 



Editor’s Introduction 


xiii 

the Section on ‘Considerations of Representability’ in Chapter VI. In the 
second edition (1909), nothing was added to this Section; but, on the other 
hand, several pages on sexual symbolism were inserted at the end of the Sec- 
tion on ‘Typical Dreams’ in Chapter V. These were very considerably ex- 
panded in the third edition (1911), while the original passage in Chapter 
VI still remained unaltered. A reorganization was evidendy overdue, and in 
the fourth edition (1914) an entirely new Section on Symbolism was intro- 
duced into Chapter VI, and into this the material on the subject that had 
accumulated in Chapter V was now transplanted, together with a quantity 
of entirely fresh material. No changes in the structure of the book were 
made in later editions, though much further matter was added. After the 
two-volume version (1925) — that is, in the eighth edition (1930) — some 
passages in the Section on ‘Typical Dreams’ in Chapter V, which had been 
altogether dropped at an earlier stage, were re-inserted. 

In the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh editions (that is from 1914 to 
1922), two essays by Otto Rank (on ‘Dreams and Creative Writing’ and 
‘Dreams and Myths’) were printed at the end of Chapter V_, but were 
subsequently omitted. 

There remain the bibliographies. The first edition contained a list of 
some eighty books, to the great majority of which Freud refers in the text. 
This was left unchanged in the second and third editions, but in the third 
a second list was added, of some forty books written since 1900. There- 
after both lists began to increase rapidly, till in the eighth edition the first 
list contained some 260 works and the second over 200. At this stage only 
a minority of the titles in the first (pre-1900) list were of books actually 
mentioned in Freud’s text; while, on the other hand, the second (post- 
1900) list (as may be gathered from Freud’s own remarks in his various 
prefaces) could not really keep pace with the production of analytic or 
quasi-analytic writings on the subject. Furthermore, quite a number of 
works quoted by Freud in the text were not to be found in either list. It 
seems probable that, from the third edition onwards, Otto Rank became 
chiefly responsible for these bibliographies. 


( 2 ) 


HISTORICAL 

The publication of Freud’s correspondence with Fliess enables us to 
follow the composition of The Interpretation of Dreams in some detail. In 



XIV 


Editor’s Introduction 


his ‘History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’ (1914^), Freud wrote, 
looking back upon his leisurely rate of publication in earlier days: ‘The In- 
terpretation of Dreams, for instance, was finished in all essentials at the be- 
ginning of 1896 but was not written down until the summer of 1899.’ 
Again, in the introductory remarks to his paper on the psychological con- 
sequences of the anatomical distinction between the sexes (1925y), he 
wrote: ‘My Interpretation of Dreams and my “Fragment of an Analysis of 
a Case of Hysteria” [1 905^] . . . were suppressed by me — if not for the 
nine years enjoined by Horace — at all events for four or five years before 
I allowed them to be published.’ We are now in a position to amplify and 
in certain respects to correct these later recollections, on the basis of the 
author’s contemporary evidence. 

Apart from a number of scattered references to the subject — which, in 
his correspondence, go back at least as early as 1882 — the first important 
published evidence of Freud’s interest in dreams occurs in the course of a 
long footnote to the first of his case histories (that of Frau Emmy von N., 
under the date of May 1 5) in Breuer and Freud’s Studies on Hysteria 
(1895). He is discussing the fact that neurotic patients seem to be under 
a necessity to bring into association with one another any ideas that hap- 
pen to be simultaneously present in their minds. He goes on: ‘Not long 
ago I was able to convince myself of the strength of this compulsion to- 
wards association from some observations made in a different field. For 
several weeks I found myself obliged to exchange my usual bed for a 
harder one, in which I had more numerous or more vivid dreams, or in 
which, it may be, I was unable to reach the normal depth of sleep. In the 
first quarter of an hour after waking I remembered all the dreams I had 
had during the night, and I took the trouble to write them down and try 
to solve them. I succeeded in tracing all these dreams back to two factors: 
(1) to the necessity for working out any ideas which I had only dwelt 
upon cursorily during the day — which had only been touched upon and 
not finally dealt with; and (2) to the compulsion to link together any 
ideas that might be present in the same state of consciousness. The sense- 
less and contradictory character of the dreams could be traced back to the 
uncontrolled ascendancy of this latter factor.’ 

This passage cannot unfortunately be exactly dated. The preface to the 
volume was written in April 1895. A letter of June 22, 1894 (Letter 19), 
seems to imply that the case histories were already finished then, and this 
was quite certainly so by March 4, 1 895. Freud’s letter of that date (Letter 
22) is of particular interest, as giving the first hint of the theory of wish- 



Editor’s Introduction 


xv 


fulfilment: in the course of it he quotes the story of the medical student’s 
‘dream of convenience’ which is included on p. 1 50 of the present volume. 
It was not, however, until July 24, 1895, that the analysis of his own dream 
of Irma’s injection — the specimen dream of Chapter II — established that 
theory definitely in Freud’s mind. (See Letter 137 of June, 1900.) In Sep- 
tember of this same year (1895) Freud wrote the first part of his ‘Project 
for a Scientific Psychology’ (published as an Appendix to the Fliess corres- 
pondence) and Sections 19, 20 and 21 of this ‘Project’ constitute a first ap- 
proach to a coherent theory of dreams. It already includes many important 
elements which re-appear in the present work, such as (1) the wish- 
fulfilling character of dreams, (2) their hallucinatory character, (3) the re- 
gressive functioning of the mind in hallucinations and dreams (this had 
already been indicated by Breuer in his theoretical contribution to Studies 
on Hysteria ), (4) the fact that the state of sleep involves motor paralysis, (5) 
the nature of the mechanism of displacement in dreams and (6) the simi- 
larity between the mechanisms of dreams and of neurotic symptoms. 
More than all this, however, the ‘Project’ gives a clear indication of what is 
probably the most momentous of the discoveries given to the world in The 
Interpretation of Dreams — the distinction between the two different modes 
of mental functioning, the Primary and Secondary Processes. 

This, however, is far from exhausting the importance of the ‘Project’ 
and of the letters to Fliess written in connection with it towards the end 
of 1895. It is no exaggeration to say that much of the seventh chapter of 
The Interpretation of Dreams, and, indeed, of Freud’s later ‘metapsycho- 
logical’ studies, has only become fully intelligible since the publication of 
the ‘Project.’ 

Students of Freud’s theoretical writings have been aware that even in 
his profoundest psychological speculations little or no discussion is to be 
found upon some of the most fundamental of the concepts of which he 
makes use: such concepts, for instance, as ‘mental energy,’ ‘sums of exci- 
tation,’ ‘cathexis,’ ‘quantity,’ ‘quality,’ ‘intensity,’ and so on. Almost the 
only explicit approach to a discussion of these concepts among Freud’s 
published works is the penultimate sentence of his first paper on the 
‘Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’ (1894^), in which he lays down a hypoth- 
esis that ‘in mental functions something is to be distinguished — a charge 
of affect or sum of excitation — which possesses all the characteristics of a 
quantity (though we have no means of measuring it), which is capable of 
increase, diminution, displacement and discharge, and which is spread 
over the memory-traces of ideas somewhat as an electric charge is spread 



XVI 


Editor’s Introduction 


over the surface of a body.’ The paucity of explanation of such basic no- 
tions in Freud’s later writings suggests that he was taking it for granted 
that they were as much a matter of course to his readers as they were to 
himself; and we owe it as a debt of gratitude to the posthumously pub- 
lished correspondence with Fliess that it throws so much light precisely 
upon these obscurities. 

It is, of course, impossible to enter here into any detailed discussion of 
the subject, and the reader must be referred to the volume itself (Freud, 
1950 a) and to Dr. Kris’s illuminating introduction to it. 1 The crux of the 
position can, however, be indicated quite simply. The essence of Freud’s 
‘Project’ lay in the notion of combining into a single whole two theories 
of different origin. The first of these was derived ultimately from the 
physiological school of Helmholtz, of which Freud’s teacher, the physiol- 
ogist Briicke, was a principal member. According to this theory, neuro- 
physiology, and consequently psychology, was governed by purely 
chemico-physical laws. Such, for instance, was the ‘law of constancy,’ fre- 
quently mentioned both by Freud and Breuer and expressed in these 
terms in 1892 (in a posthumously published draft, Breuer and Freud, 
1940): ‘The nervous system endeavours to keep constant something in its 
functional condition that may be described as the “sum of excitation.’” 
The greater part of the theoretical contribution made by Breuer (another 
disciple of the Helmholtz school) to the Studies on Hysteria was an elabo- 
rate construction along these lines. The second main theory called into 
play by Freud in his ‘Project’ was the anatomical doctrine of the neurone, 
which was becoming accepted by neuro-anatomists at the end of the 
eighties. (The term ‘neurone’ was only introduced, by Waldeyer, in 
1891.) This doctrine laid it down that the functional unit of the central 
nervous system was a distinct cell, having no direct anatomical continuity 
with adjacent cells. The opening sentences of the ‘Project’ show clearly 
how its basis lay in a combination of these two theories. Its aim, wrote 
Freud, was ‘to represent psychical processes as quantitatively determined 
states of specifiable material particles.’ He went on to postulate that these 
‘material particles’ were the neurones and that what distinguished their 
being in a state of activity from their being in a state of rest was a ‘quan- 
tity’ which was ‘subject to the general laws of motion.’ Thus a neurone 


1 Bernfeld’s paper on ‘Freud’s Earliest Theories’ (1944) is also of great interest in 
this connection. 




Editor’s Introduction 


XVII 


might either be ‘empty’ or ‘filled with a certain quantity,’ that is ‘ca- 
thected.’ 1 ‘Nervous excitation’ was to be interpreted as a ‘quantity’ flow- 
ing through a system of neurones, and such a current might either be 
resisted or facilitated according to the state of the ‘contact-barriers’ be- 
tween the neurones. (It was only later, in 1 897, that the term ‘synapse’ 
was introduced by Foster and Sherrington.) The functioning of the whole 
nervous system was subject to a general principle of ‘inertia,’ according to 
which neurones always tend to get rid of any ‘quantity’ with which they 
may be filled — a principle correlative with the principle of ‘constancy.’ 
Using these and similar concepts as his bricks, Freud constructed a highly 
complicated and extraordinarily ingenious working model of the mind as 
a piece of neurological machinery. 

A principal part was played in Freud’s scheme by a hypothetical divi- 
sion of the neurones into three classes or systems, differentiated according 
to their modes of functioning. Of these the first two were concerned re- 
spectively with external stimuli and internal excitations. Both of these op- 
erated on a purely quantitative basis; that is to say, their actions were 
wholly determined by the magnitude of the nervous excitations imping- 
ing on them. The third system was correlated with the qualitative differ- 
ences which distinguish conscious sensations and feelings. This division 
of the neurones into three systems was the basis of elaborate physiological 
explanations of such things as the working of memory, the perception of 
reality, the process of thought, and also the phenomena of dreaming and 
of neurotic disorder. 

But obscurities and difficulties began to accumulate and, during the 
months after writing the ‘Project,’ Freud was continually emending his 
theories. As time passed, his interest was gradually diverted from neuro- 
logical and theoretical on to psychological and clinical problems, and he 
eventually abandoned the entire scheme. And when some years later, in 
the seventh chapter of the present book, he took the theoretical problem 
up once more — though he certainly never gave up his belief that ulti- 
mately a physical groundwork for psychology would be established — the 
neuro-physiological basis was ostensibly dropped. Nevertheless — and this 
is why the ‘Project’ is of importance to readers of The Interpretation of 


1 It must be emphasized that these speculations of Freud’s date from a period 
many years before any systematic investigations had been made into the nature 
of nervous impulses and the conditions governing their transmission. 




xviii Editor’s Introduction 

Dreams — much of the general pattern of the earlier scheme, and many of 
its elements, were carried over into the new one. The systems of neurones 
were replaced by psychical systems or agencies; a hypothetical ‘cathexis’ of 
psychical energy took the place of the physical ‘quantity’; the principle of 
inertia became the basis of the pleasure (or, as Freud here called it, the un- 
pleasure) principle. Moreover, some of the detailed accounts of psychical 
processes given in the seventh chapter owe much to their physiological 
forerunners and can be more easily understood by reference to them. This 
applies, for instance, to the description of the laying down of memory- 
traces in the ‘mnemic systems,’ to the discussion of the nature of wishes 
and of the different ways of satisfying them, and to the stress laid upon 
the part played by verbal thought-processes in the making of adjustments 
to the demands of reality. 

All of this is enough largely to justify Freud’s assertion that The Inter- 
pretation of Dreams ‘was finished in all essentials at the beginning of 
1896.’ Nevertheless, we are now in a position to add some qualifications. 
Thus, the existence of the Oedipus complex was only established during 
the summer and autumn of 1897 (Letters 64 to 71); and though this was 
not in itself a direct contribution to the theory of dreams, it nevertheless 
played a large part in emphasizing the infantile roots of the unconscious 
wishes underlying dreams. Of more obvious theoretical importance was 
the discovery of the omnipresence in dreams of the wish to sleep. This 
was announced by Freud as late as on June 9, 1899 (Letter 108). Again, 
the first hint at the process of ‘secondary revision’ seems to be given in a 
letter of July 7, 1897 (Letter 66). The similarity in structure between 
dreams and neurotic symptoms had, as we have seen, already been re- 
marked on in the ‘Project’ in 1895, and was alluded to at intervals up to 
the autumn of 1897. Curiously enough, however, it seems thereafter to 
have been forgotten; for it is announced on January 3, 1899 (Letter 101), 
as a new discovery and as an explanation of why the book had so long re- 
mained unfinished. 

The Fliess correspondence enables us to follow the actual process of 
composition in some detail. The idea of writing the book is first men- 
tioned by Freud in May 1897, but quickly put on one side, probably be- 
cause his interest began to be centred at that time on his self-analysis, 
which was to lead during the summer to his discovery of the Oedipus 
complex. At the end of the year the book was taken up once more, and in 
the early months of 1898 a first draft of the whole work seems to have 



Editor’s Introduction 


XIX 


been completed, with the exception of the first chapter. 1 Work upon it 
came to a standstill in June of that year and was not resumed after the 
summer vacation. On October 23, 1898 (Letter 99), Freud writes that the 
book ‘remains stationary, unchanged; I have no motive for preparing it for 
publication, and the gap in the psychology [i.e., Chapter VII] as well as 
the gap left by removing the completely analysed sample dream are obsta- 
cles to my finishing it which I have not yet overcome.’ There was a pause 
of many months, till suddenly, and, as Freud himself writes, ‘for no par- 
ticular reason,’ the book began to stir again towards the end of May 1899. 
Thereafter it proceeded rapidly. The first chapter, dealing with the litera- 
ture, which had always been a bug-bear to Freud, was finished in June and 
the first pages sent to the printer. The revision of the middle chapters was 
completed by the end of August, and the last, psychological, chapter was 
entirely re-written and the final pages despatched early in September. 

Both the manuscript and the proofs were regularly submitted by Freud 
to Fliess for his criticism. He seems to have had considerable influence on 
the final shape of the book, and to have been responsible for the omission 
(evidently on grounds of discretion) of an analysis of one important 
dream of Freud’s own (cf. p. xviii). But the severest criticisms came from 
the author himself, and these were directed principally against the style 
and literary form. ‘I think,’ he wrote on September 21, 1899 (Letter 
1 19), when the book was finished, ‘my self-criticism was not entirely un- 
justified. Somewhere hidden within me I too have some fragmentary 
sense of form, some appreciation of beauty as a species of perfection; and 
the involved sentences of my book on dreams, bolstered up on indirect 
phrases and with sidelong glances at their subject-matter, have gravely af- 
fronted some ideal within me. And I am scarcely wrong in regarding this 
lack of form as a sign of an incomplete mastery of the material.’ 

But in spite of these self-criticisms, and in spite of the depression which 
followed the almost total neglect of the book by the outside world — only 
351 copies were sold in the first six years after publication — The Interpre- 
tation of Dreams was always regarded by Freud as his most important 
work: ‘Insight such as this,’ as he wrote in his preface to the third English 
edition, ‘falls to one’s lot but once in a lifetime.’ 


1 This must be what is alluded to in a passage on p. 483 of the present work, in 
which Freud remarks that he had ‘postponed the printing of the finished manu- 
script for more than a year.’ Actually the first chapter had still to be written. 




XX 


Editor’s Introduction 


( 3 ) 


THE PRESENT ENGLISH EDITION 

The present translation is based on the eighth (1930) German edition, 
the last published during its author’s life. At the same time, it differs from 
all previous editions (both German and English) in an important respect, 
for it is in the nature of a ‘Variorum’ edition. An effort has been made to 
indicate, with dates, every alteration of substance introduced into the book 
since its first issue. Wherever material has been dropped or greatly modi- 
fied in later editions, the cancelled passage or earlier version is given in a 
footnote. The only exception is that Rank’s two appendices to Chapter VI 
have been omitted. The question of their inclusion was seriously consid- 
ered; but it was decided against doing so. The essays are entirely self- 
contained and have no direct connections with Freud’s book; they would 
have filled another fifty pages or so; and they would be particularly un- 
enlightening to English readers, since they deal in the main with German 
literature and German mythology. 

The bibliographies have been entirely recast. The first of these con- 
tains a list of every work actually referred to in the text or footnotes. This 
bibliography is also arranged to serve as an Author Index. The second 
bibliography contains all the works in the German pre-1900 list not ac- 
tually quoted by Freud. It has seemed worth while to print this, since no 
other comparably full bibliography of the older literature on dreams is 
easily accessible. Writings after 1900, apart from those actually quoted 
and consequently included in the first bibliography, have been disre- 
garded. A warning must, however, be issued in regard to both my lists. 
Investigation has shown a very high proportion of errors in the German 
bibliographies. These have been corrected wherever possible; but quite a 
number of the entries have proved to be untraceable in London, and 
these (which are distinguished by an asterisk) must be regarded as suspect. 

Editorial additions are printed in square brackets. Many readers will 
no doubt be irritated by the number of references and other explanatory 
notes. The references, however, are essentially to Freud’s own writings, 
and very few will be found to other authors (apart, of course, from refer- 
ences made by Freud himself). In any case, the fact must be faced that 
The Interpretation of Dreams is one of the major classics of scientific liter- 
ature and that the time has come to treat it as such. It is the editor’s hope 
and belief that actually the references, and more particularly the cross- 



Editor’s Introduction 


XXI 


references to other parts of the work itself, will make it easier for serious 
students to follow the intricacies of the material. Readers in search of 
mere entertainment — if there are any such — must steel themselves to dis- 
regard these parentheses. 

A word must be added upon the translation itself. Great attention has 
had, of course, to be paid to the details of the wording of the text of 
dreams. Where the English rendering strikes the reader as unusually stiff, 
he may assume that the stiffness has been imposed by some verbal neces- 
sity determined by the interpretation that is to follow. Where there are in- 
consistencies between different versions of the text of the same dream, he 
may assume that there are parallel inconsistencies in the original. These 
verbal difficulties culminate in the fairly frequent instances in which an 
interpretation depends entirely upon a pun. There are three methods of 
dealing with such situations. The translator can omit the dream entirely, 
or he can replace it by another parallel dream, whether derived from his 
own experience or fabricated ad hoc. These two methods have been the 
ones adopted in the main in the earlier translations of the book. But there 
are serious objections to them. We must once more remember that we are 
dealing with a scientific classic. What we want to hear about are the ex- 
amples chosen by Freud — not by someone else. Accordingly the present 
translator has adopted the pedantic and tiresome third alternative of 
keeping the original German pun and laboriously explaining it in a 
square bracket or footnote. Any amusement that might be got out of it 
completely evaporates in the process. But that, unfortunately, is a sacrifice 
that has to be made. 

Help in the laborious task of proof-reading has been generously given 
(among others) by Mrs. R. S. Partridge and Dr. C. F. Rycroft. Mrs. Par- 
tridge is also largely responsible for the index. The revision of the bibli- 
ographies has in the main been carried out by Mr. G. Talland. 

Finally, the editor’s thanks are due to Dr. Ernest Jones for his constant 
advice and encouragement. The first volume of his Freud biography will 
be found to throw invaluable light on the background of this work as a 
whole, as well as on many of its details. 




Preface to the First Edition 


I have attempted in this volume to give an account of the interpretation 
of dreams; and in doing so I have not, 1 believe, trespassed beyond the 
sphere of interest covered by neuro-pathology. For psychological investi- 
gation shows that the dream is the first member of a class of abnormal 
psychical phenomena of which further members, such as hysterical pho- 
bias, obsessions and delusions, are bound for practical reasons to be a 
matter of concern to physicians. As will be seen in the sequel, dreams can 
make no such claim to practical importance; but their theoretical value as 
a paradigm is on the other hand proportionately greater. Anyone who has 
failed to explain the origin of dream-images can scarcely hope to under- 
stand phobias, obsessions or delusions or to bring a therapeutic influence 
to bear on them. 

But the same correlation that is responsible for the importance of the 
subject must also bear the blame for the deficiencies of the present work. 
The broken threads which so frequently interrupt my presentation are 
nothing less than the many points of contact between the problem of the 
formation of dreams and the more comprehensive problems of psycho- 
pathology. These cannot be treated here, but, if time and strength allow 
and further material comes to hand, will form the subject of later 
communications. 

The difficulties of presentation have been further increased by the pe- 
culiarities of the material which I have had to use to illustrate the inter- 
preting of dreams. It will become plain in the course of the work itself 
why it is that none of the dreams already reported in the literature of the 
subject or collected from unknown sources could be of any use for my 
purposes. The only dreams open to my choice were my own and those of 
my patients undergoing psychoanalytic treatment. But I was precluded 
from using the latter material by the fact that in its case the dream- 
processes were subject to an undesirable complication owing to the added 

xxiii 



XXIV 


Preface to the First Edition 


presence of neurotic features. But if I was to report my own dreams, it in- 
evitably followed that I should have to reveal to the public gaze more of 
the intimacies of my mental life than I liked, or than is normally neces- 
sary for any writer who is a man of science and not a poet. Such was the 
painful but unavoidable necessity; and I have submitted to it rather than 
totally abandon the possibility of giving the evidence for my psychologi- 
cal findings. Naturally, however, I have been unable to resist the tempta- 
tion of taking the edge off some of my indiscretions by omissions and 
substitutions. But whenever this has happened, the value of my instances 
has been very definitely diminished. I can only express a hope that readers 
of this book will put themselves in my difficult situation and treat me 
with indulgence, and further, that anyone who finds any sort of reference 
to himself in my dreams may be willing to grant me the right of freedom 
of thought — in my dream-life, if nowhere else. 



Preface to the Second Edition 


If within ten years of the publication of this book (which is very far from 
being an easy one to read) a second edition is called for, this is not due to 
the interest taken in it by the professional circles to whom my original pref- 
ace was addressed. My psychiatric colleagues seem to have taken no trouble 
to overcome the initial bewilderment created by my new approach to 
dreams. The professional philosophers have become accustomed to polish- 
ing off the problems of dream-life (which they treat as a mere appendix to 
conscious states) in a few sentences — and usually in the same ones; and 
they have evidently failed to notice that we have something here from 
which a number of inferences can be drawn that are bound to transform 
our psychological theories. The attitude adopted by reviewers in the scien- 
tific periodicals could only lead one to suppose that my work was doomed 
to be sunk into complete silence; while the small group or gallant support- 
ers, who practise medical psycho-analysis under my guidance and who 
follow my example in interpreting dreams and make use of their interpre- 
tations in treating neurotics, would never have exhausted the first edition 
of the book. Thus it is that I feel indebted to a wider circle of educated and 
curious-minded readers, whose interest has led me to take up once more af- 
ter nine years this difficult, but in many respects fundamental, work. 

I am glad to say that I have found little to change in it. Here and there 
I have inserted some new material, added some fresh points of detail de- 
rived from my increased experience, and at some few points recast my 
statements. But the essence of what I have written about dreams and their 
interpretation, as well as about the psychological theorems to be deduced 
from them — all this remains unaltered: subjectively at all events, it has 
stood the test of time. Anyone who is acquainted with my other writings 
(on the aetiology and mechanism of the psycho-neuroses) will know that 
I have never put forward inconclusive opinions as though they were estab- 
lished facts, and that I have always sought to modify my statements so that 


xxv 



XXVI 


Preface to the Second Edition 


they may keep in step with my advancing knowledge. In the sphere of my 
dream-life I have been able to leave my original assertions unchanged. 
During the long years in which I have been working at the problems of the 
neuroses I have often been in doubt and sometimes been shaken in my 
convictions. At such times it has always been the Interpretation of Dreams 
that has given me back my certainty. It is thus a sure instinct which has led 
my many scientific opponents to refuse to follow me more especially in my 
researches upon dreams. 

An equal durability and power to withstand any far-reaching alter- 
ations during the process of revision has been shown by the material of 
the book, consisting as it does of dreams of my own which have for the 
most part been overtaken or made valueless by the march of events and 
by which 1 illustrated the rules of dream-interpretation. For this book has 
a further subjective significance for me personally — a significance which 
I only grasped after 1 had completed it. It was, I found, a portion of my 
own self-analysis, my reaction to my father’s death — that is to say, to the 
most important event, the most poignant loss, of a man’s life. Having dis- 
covered that this was so, I felt unable to obliterate the traces of the expe- 
rience. 1 To my readers, however, it will be a matter of indifference upon 
what particular material they learn to appreciate the importance of 
dreams and how to interpret them. 

Wherever I have found it impossible to incorporate some essential ad- 
dition into the original context, I have indicated its more recent date by 
enclosing it in square brackets. 2 

Berchtesgaden, Summer 1908 


1 [Freud’s father had died in 1896. Some account of his feelings at the time will 
be found in his letter to Fliess of November 2, 1896. (Freud 1950 a. Letter 50.)] 

1 [Footnote added 1914.] In later editions [from the fourth onwards] these were 
omitted. 



Preface to the Third Edition 


Nine years elapsed between the first and second editions of this book, 
but after scarcely more than a single year a third edition has become nec- 
essary. This new turn of events may please me; but just as formerly I was 
unwilling to regard the neglect of my book by readers as evidence of its 
worthlessness, so I cannot claim that the interest which is now being 
taken in it is a proof of its excellence. 

Even the Interpretation of Dreams has not been left untouched by the 
advance of scientific knowledge. When I wrote it in 1899, my theory of 
sexuality was not yet in existence and the analysis of the more complicated 
forms of psycho-neurosis was only just beginning. It was my hope that 
dream-interpretation would help to make possible the psychological analy- 
sis of neuroses; since then a deeper understanding of neuroses has reacted 
in turn upon our view of dreams. The theory of dream-interpretation has 
itself developed further in a direction on which insufficient stress had been 
laid in the first edition of this book. My own experience, as well as the 
works of Wilhelm Stekel and others, have since taught me to form a truer 
estimate of the extent and importance of symbolism in dreams (or rather 
in unconscious thinking). Thus in the course of these years much has ac- 
cumulated which demands attention. I have endeavoured to take these in- 
novations into account by making numerous interpolations in the text and 
by additional footnotes. If these additions threaten at times to burst the 
whole framework of the book or if I have not everywhere succeeded in 
bringing the original text up to the level of our present knowledge, I must 
ask the reader’s indulgence for these deficiencies: they are the results and 
signs of the present increasingly rapid development of our science. 1 may 
even venture to prophesy in what other directions later editions of this 
book — if any should be needed — will differ from the present one. They 
will have on the one hand to afford closer contact with the copious mate- 
rial presented in imaginative writing, in myths, in linguistic usage and in 


xxvu 



xxviii Preface to the Fourth Edition 

folklore; while on the other hand they will have to deal in greater detail 
than has here been possible with the relations of dreams to neuroses and 
mental diseases. 

Herr Otto Rank has given me valuable assistance in selecting the ad- 
ditional matter and has been entirely responsible for correcting the 
proofs. I owe my thanks to him and to many others for their contribu- 
tions and corrections. 

Vienna, Spring 1911 


Preface to the Fourth Edition 


Last year ( 1 9 1 3) Dr. A. A. Brill of New York produced an English transla- 
tion of this book ( The Interpretation of Dreams, G. Allen & Co., London). 

On this occasion Dr. Otto Rank has not only corrected the proofs but 
has also contributed two self-contained chapters to the text — the appen- 
dices to Chapter VI. 


Vienna, June 191 4 



Preface to the Fifth Edition 


Interest in the Interpretation of Dreams has not flagged even during the 
World War, and while it is still in progress a new edition has become nec- 
essary. It has not been possible, however, to notice fully publications since 
1914; neither Dr. Rank nor I have any knowledge of foreign works since 
that date. 

A Hungarian translation, prepared by Dr. Hollos and Dr. Ferenczi, is 
on the point of appearing. In 1916-17 my Introductory Lectures on Psycho- 
Analysis were published in Vienna by Hugo Heller. The central section of 
these, comprising eleven lectures, is devoted to an account of dreams 
which aims at being more elementary and at being in closer contact with 
the theory of the neuroses than the present work. On the whole it is in 
the nature of an epitome of the Interpretation of Dreams, though at certain 
points it enters into greater detail. 

I have not been able to bring myself to embark upon any fundamental 
revision of this book, which might bring it up to the level of our present 
psycho-analytic views but would on the other hand destroy its historic 
character. I think, however, that after an existence of nearly twenty years 
it has accomplished its task. 

Budapest-Steinbruch,/m/)/ 1918 


Preface to the Sixth Edition 


Owing to the difficulties in which the book trade is placed at present, this 
new edition has long been in demand, and the preceding edition has, for 
the first time, been reprinted without any alterations. Only the bibliography 


xxix 



XXX 


Preface to the Sixth Edition 


at the end of the volume has been completed and brought up to date by Dr. 
Otto Rank. 

Thus my assumption that after an existence of nearly twenty years this 
book had accomplished its task has not been confirmed. On the contrary, 
I might say that it has a new task to perform. If its earlier function was to 
offer some information on the nature of dreams, now it has the no less 
important duty of dealing with the obstinate misunderstandings to which 
that information is subject. 

Vienna, April 1921 



Preface to the Eighth Edition 


During the interval between the publication of the last (seventh) edition 
of this book in 1922 and the present one, my Gesammelte Schriften [Col- 
lected Writings] have been issued in Vienna by the Internationaler Psycho- 
analytischer Verlag. The second volume of that collection consists of an 
exact reprint of the first edition of the Interpretation of Dreams, while the 
third volume contains all the additions that have since been made to it. 
The translations of the book which have appeared during the same interval 
are based upon the usual, single-volume, form of the work: a French one 
by I. Meyerson published under the title of La science des reves in the 
‘Bibliotheque de Philosophic Contemporaine’ in 1926; a Swedish one by 
John Landquist, Dromtydning (1927); and a Spanish one by Luis Lopez- 
Ballesteros y de Torres [1922], which occupies Volumes VI and VII of the 
Obras Completas. The Hungarian translation, which I thought was on the 
point of completion as long ago as in 1918, has even now not appeared. 1 

In the present revised edition of the work I have again treated it essen- 
tially as an historic document and I have only made such alterations in it 
as were suggested by the clarification and deepening of my own opinions. 
In accordance with this, I have finally given up the idea of including a list 
of works on the problems of dreams published since the book’s first ap- 
pearance, and that section has now been dropped. The two essays which 
Otto Rank contributed to earlier editions, on ‘Dreams and Creative Writ- 
ing’ and ‘Dreams and Myths’, have also been omitted. [See p. xx.] 

Vienna, December 1929 


1 [It was published in 1934. — During Freud’s lifetime, in addition to the transla- 
tions mentioned in these prefaces, a Russian version appeared in 1913, a Japa- 
nese one in 1930 and a Czech one in 1938.] 


xxxi 




Preface to the Third (Revised) English Edition 


In 1909 G. Stanley Hall invited me to Clark University, in Worcester, to 
give the first lectures on psycho-analysis. In the same year Dr. Brill pub- 
lished the first of his translations of my writings, which were soon fol- 
lowed by further ones. If psycho-analysis now plays a role in American 
intellectual life, or if it does so in the future, a large part of this result will 
have to be attributed to this and other activities of Dr. Brill’s. 

His first translation of The Interpretation of Dreams appeared in 1913. 
Since then much has taken place in the world, and much has been 
changed in our views about the neuroses. This book, with the new con- 
tribution to psychology which surprised the world when it was published 
(1900), remains essentially unaltered. It contains, even according to my 
present-day judgment, the most valuable of all the discoveries it has been 
my good fortune to make. Insight such as this falls to one’s lot but once 
in a lifetime. 


FREUD 


Vienna, March 15, 1931 


1 [This is not included in the German editions and no German text is extant. It is 
here reprinted exactly from the 1932 English edition.] 


XXXll 



THE INTERPRETATION 
OF DREAMS 




CHAPTER I 


THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE DEALING WITH 
THE PROBLEMS OF DREAMS 1 


In the pages that follow I shall bring forward proof that there is a psycho- 
logical technique which makes it possible to interpret dreams, and that, 
if that procedure is employed, every dream reveals itself as a psychical 
structure which has a meaning and which can be inserted at an assignable 
point in the mental activities of waking life. I shall further endeavour to 
elucidate the processes to which the strangeness and obscurity of dreams 
are due and to deduce from those processes the nature of the psychical 
forces by whose concurrent or mutually opposing action dreams are gen- 
erated. Having gone thus far, my description will break off, for it will 
have reached a point at which the problem of dreams merges into more 
comprehensive problems, the solution of which must be approached 
upon the basis of material of another kind. 

I shall give by way of preface a review of the work done by earlier writ- 
ers on the subject as well as of the present position of the problems of 
dreams in the world of science, since in the course of my discussion I shall 
not often have occasion to revert to those topics. For, in spite of many 
thousands of years of effort, the scientific understanding of dreams has 
made very little advance — a fact so generally admitted in the literature that 
it seems unnecessary to quote instances in support of it. In these writings, 


1 [ Footnote added in second to seventh editions:] Up to the date of the first publi- 
cation of this book (1900). 


35 



36 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


of which a list appears at the end of my work, many stimulating observa- 
tions are to be found and a quantity of interesting material bearing upon 
our theme, but little or nothing that touches upon the essential nature of 
dreams or that offers a final solution of any of their enigmas. And still less, 
of course, has passed into the knowledge of educated laymen. 

It may be asked 1 what view was taken of dreams in prehistoric times 
by primitive races of men and what effect dreams may have had upon the 
formation of their conceptions of the world and of the soul; and this is a 
subject of such great interest that it is only with much reluctance that I 
refrain from dealing with it in this connection. I must refer my readers to 
the standard works of Sir John Lubbock, Herbert Spencer, E. B. Tylor 
and others, and I will only add that we shall not be able to appreciate the 
wide range of these problems and speculations until we have dealt with 
the task that lies before us here — the interpretation of dreams. 

The prehistoric view of dreams is no doubt echoed in the attitude 
adopted towards dreams by the peoples of classical antiquity . 2 They took 
it as axiomatic that dreams were connected with the world of super- 
human beings in whom they believed and that they were revelations from 
gods and daemons. There could be no question, moreover, that for the 
dreamer dreams had an important purpose, which was as a rule to foretell 
the future. The extraordinary variety in the content of dreams and in the 
impression they produced made it difficult, however, to have any uniform 
view of them and made it necessary to classify dreams into numerous 
groups and subdivisions according to their importance and trustworthi- 
ness. The position adopted towards dreams by individual philosophers in 
antiquity was naturally dependent to some extent upon their attitude to- 
wards divination in general. 

In the two works of Aristotle which deal with dreams, they have already 
become a subject for psychological study. We are told that dreams are not 
sent by the gods and are not of a divine character, but that they are ‘dae- 
monic,’ since nature is ‘daemonic’ and not divine. Dreams, that is, do not 
arise from supernatural manifestations but follow the laws of the human 


1 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1914.] 

2 [Footnote added 1914:] What follows is based on Buchsen-schiitz’s scholarly 
study (1868). 




I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


37 


spirit, though the latter, it is true, is akin to the divine. Dreams are defined 
as the mental activity of the sleeper in so far as he is asleep. 1 

Aristotle was aware of some of the characteristics of dream-life. He 
knew, for instance, that dreams give a magnified construction to small 
stimuli arising during sleep. ‘Men think that they are walking through fire 
and are tremendously hot, when there is only a slight heating about cer- 
tain parts.’ 2 And from this circumstance he draws the conclusion that 
dreams may very well betray to a physician the first signs of some bodily 
change which has not been observed in waking. 3 

Before the time of Aristotle, as we know, the ancients regarded dreams 
not as a product of the dreaming mind but as something introduced by a 
divine agency; and already the two opposing currents, which we shall find 
influencing opinions of dream-life at every period of history, were making 
themselves felt. The distinction was drawn between truthful and valuable 
dreams, sent to the sleeper to warn him or foretell the future, and vain, 
deceitful and worthless dreams, whose purpose it was to mislead or de- 
stroy him. 

Gruppe (1906, 2, 930) 4 quotes a classification of dreams on these lines 
made by Macrobius and Artemidorus [of Daldis (see p. 130 n. 2)]: ‘Dreams 
were divided into two classes. One class was supposed to be influenced by the 
present or past, but to have no future significance. It included the Evtmvia 


1 [De divinatione per somnum, II (Trans., 1935, 377) and De somnus. III (Trans., 
1935, 365). — In the first edition (1900) this paragraph ran: ‘The first work in 
which dreams were treated as a subject for psychological study seems to be that 
of Aristotle (On Dreams and Their Interpretation). Aristotle declares that dreams 
are of a “daemonic” but not of a “divine” nature; no doubt this distinction has 
some great significance if we knew how to translate it correctly.’ The next para- 
graph ended with the sentence: 'My own insufficient knowledge and my lack of 
specialist assistance prevent my entering more deeply into Aristotle’s treatise.’ 
These passages were altered into their present form in 1914; and a note in 
Gesammelte Schrifien, 3 (1925), 4, points out that in fact Aristotle wrote not one 
but two works on the subject.] 

2 [De divinatione, I (Trans., 1935, 375)]. 

3 [Footnote added 1914:] The Greek physician Hippocrates deals with the relation 
of dreams to illnesses in one of the chapters of his famous work [Ancient Medi- 
cine, X (Trans., 1923, 31). See also Regimen, IV, 88, passim. (Trans., 1931, 425, 
etc.)]. 

4 [This paragraph was added as a footnote in 191 1 and included in the text in 1914.] 




38 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


or insomnia , which gave a direct representation of a given idea or of its 
opposite — e.g. of hunger or of its satiation — and the tpavx&crpaxa, which 
lent a fantastic extension to the given idea — e.g. the nightmare or ephialtes. 
The other class, on the contrary, was supposed to determine the future. It in- 
cluded (1) direct prophecies received in a dream (the xpiiporucrpos or orac- 
ulurri), (2) previsions of some future event (the opapa or visio) and (3) 
symbolic dreams, which needed interpretation (the oveipog or somnium ). 
This theory persisted for many centuries.’ 

This variation in the value that was to be assigned to dreams 1 was 
closely related to the problem of ‘interpreting’ them. Important conse- 
quences were in general to be expected from dreams. But dreams were not 
all immediately comprehensible and it was impossible to tell whether a 
particular unintelligible dream might not be making some important an- 
nouncement. This provided an incentive for elaborating a method by 
which the unintelligible content of a dream might be replaced by one that 
was comprehensible and significant. In the later years of antiquity Artemi- 
dorus of Daldis was regarded as the greatest authority on the interpretation 
of dreams, and the survival of his exhaustive work [ Oneirocritica ] must 
compensate us for the loss of the other writings on the same subject. 2 

The pre-scientific view of dreams adopted by the peoples of antiquity 
was certainly in complete harmony with their view of the universe in gen- 
eral, which led them to project into the external world as though they 
were realities things which in fact enjoyed reality only within their own 
minds. Moreover, their view of dreams took into account the principal 
impression produced upon the waking mind in the morning by what is 
left of a dream in the memory: an impression of something alien, arising 
from another world and contrasting with the remaining contents of the 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.] 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] For the further history of dream-interpretation in the 
Middle Ages see Diepgen (1912) and the monographs of Forster (1910 and 
1911), Gotthard (1912), etc. Dream-interpretation among the Jews has been 
discussed by Almoli (1848), Amram (1901), and Lowinger (1908); also, quite 
recently and taking account of psychoanalytic findings, by Lauer (1913). Infor- 
mation upon dream-interpretation among the Arabs has been given by Drexl 
(1909), Schwarz (1913) and the missionary Tfinkdji (1913); among the Japa- 
nese by Miura (1906) and Iwaya (1902); among the Chinese by Seeker (1909 — 
1 0); and among the people of India by Negelein (1912). 




I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


39 


mind. Incidentally, it would be a mistake to suppose that the theory of 
the supernatural origin of dreams is without its supporters in our own 
days. We may leave on one side pietistic and mystical writers, who, in- 
deed, are perfectly justified in remaining in occupation of what is left of 
the once wide domain of the supernatural so long as that field is not con- 
quered by scientific explanation. But apart from them, one comes across 
clear-headed men, without any extravagant ideas, who seek to support 
their religious faith in the existence and activity of superhuman spiritual 
forces precisely by the inexplicable nature of the phenomena of dreaming. 
(Cf. Haffner, 1887.) The high esteem in which dream-life is held by some 
schools of philosophy (by the followers of Schelling, 1 for instance) is 
clearly an echo of the divine nature of dreams which was undisputed in 
antiquity. Nor are discussions of the premonitory character of dreams and 
their power to foretell the future at an end. For attempts at giving a psy- 
chological explanation have been inadequate to cover the material col- 
lected, however decidedly the sympathies of those of a scientific cast of 
mind may incline against accepting any such beliefs. 

It is difficult to write a history of the scientific study of the problems 
of dreams because, however valuable that study may have been at a few 
points, no line of advance in any particular direction can be traced. No 
foundation has been laid of secure findings upon which a later investiga- 
tor might build; but each new writer examines the same problems afresh 
and begins again, as it were, from the beginning. If I attempted to take 
those who have written on the question in chronological order and to 
give a summary of their views upon the problems of dreams, I should 
have to abandon any hope of giving a comprehensive general picture of 
the present state of knowledge of the subject. I have therefore chosen to 
frame my account according to topics rather than authors and, as I raise 
each dream-problem in turn, I shall bring forward whatever material the 
literature contains for its solution. 


1 [The chief exponent of the pantheistic ‘Philosophy of Nature,’ popular in Ger- 
many during the early part of the nineteenth century. — Freud often recurred to 
the question of the occult significance of dreams. Cf. Freud 1922a, 1925/ (Part 
3) and 1933a (Lecture 30). An allegedly premonitory dream is discussed in 
Freud 1941c [1899], printed as an Appendix to this work, p. 617. See also 
pp. 93 and 615 below.] 




40 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


Since, however, it has been impossible for me to cover the whole of the 
literature of the subject, widely scattered as it is and trenching upon many 
other fields, I must ask my readers to be satisfied so long as no fundamen- 
tal fact and no important point of view is overlooked in my description. 

Until recently most writers on the subject have felt obliged to treat 
sleep and dreams as a single topic, and as a rule they have dealt in addi- 
tion with analogous conditions on the fringe of pathology, and dream- 
like states, such as hallucinations, visions and so on. The latest works, on 
the contrary, show a preference for a restricted theme and take as their 
subject, perhaps, some isolated question in the field of dream-life. I 
should be glad to see in this change of attitude the expression of a con- 
viction that in such obscure matters it will only be possible to arrive at ex- 
planations and agreed results by a series of detailed investigations. A piece 
of detailed research of that kind, predominantly psychological in charac- 
ter, is all I have to offer in these pages. I have had little occasion to deal 
with the problem of sleep, for that is essentially a problem of physiology, 
even though one of the characteristics of the state of sleep must be that it 
brings about modifications in the conditions of functioning of the mental 
apparatus. The literature on the subject of sleep is accordingly disregarded 
in what follows. 

The questions raised by a scientific enquiry into the phenomena of 
dreams as such may be grouped under the headings which follow, though 
a certain amount of overlapping cannot be avoided. 



A. Dreams and Waking Life 


41 


(A) 

THE RELATION OF DREAMS TO WAKING LIFE 

The unsophisticated waking judgement of someone who has just 
woken from sleep assumes that his dreams, even if they did not them- 
selves come from another world, had at all events carried him off into an- 
other world. The old physiologist Burdach (1838, 499), to whom we owe 
a careful and shrewd account of the phenomena of dreams, has given ex- 
pression to this conviction in a much-quoted passage: ‘In dreams, daily 
life, with its labours and pleasures, its joys and pains, is never repeated. 
On the contrary, dreams have as their very aim to free us from it. Even 
when our whole mind has been filled with something, when we are torn 
by some deep sorrow or when all our intellectual power is absorbed in 
some problem, a dream will do no more than enter into the tone of our 
mood and represent reality in symbols.’ I. H. Fichte (1864, 1, 541), in 
the same sense, actually speaks of ‘complementary dreams’ and describes 
them as one of the secret benefactions of the self-healing nature of the 
spirit. 1 Striimpell (1877, 16) writes to similar effect in his study on the 
nature and origin of dreams — a work which is widely and deservedly held 
in high esteem: ‘A man who dreams is removed from the world of waking 
consciousness.’ So too (ibid., 17): ‘In dreams our memory of the ordered 
contents of waking consciousness and of its normal behaviour is as good 
as completely lost.’ And again (ibid., 19) he writes that ‘the mind is cut 
off in dreams, almost without memory, from the ordinary content and af- 
fairs of waking life.’ 

The preponderant majority of writers, however, take a contrary view 
of the relation of dreams to waking life. Thus Haffner (1887, 245): ‘In 
the first place, dreams carry on waking life. Our dreams regularly attach 
themselves to the ideas that have been in our consciousness shortly be- 
fore. Accurate observation will almost always find a thread which con- 
nects a dream with the experiences of the previous day.’ Weygandt (1893, 


1 [This sentence was added in 1914.] 




42 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


6) specifically contradicts Burdach’s statement which I have just quoted: 
‘For it may often, and apparently in the majority of dreams, be observed 
that they actually lead us back to ordinary life instead of freeing us from 
it.’ Maury (1878, 51) advances a concise formula: ‘Nous revons de ce que 
nous avons vu, dit, desire ou fait’; 1 while Jessen, in his book on psychol- 
ogy (1855, 530), remarks at somewhat greater length: ‘The content of a 
dream is invariably more or less determined by the individual personality 
of the dreamer, by his age, sex, class, standard of education and habitual 
way of living, and by the events and experiences of his whole previous 
life.’ 

The most uncompromising attitude on this question 2 is adopted by 
J.G.E. Maass, the philosopher (1805, [1, 168 and 173]), quoted by Win- 
terstein (1912): ‘Experience confirms our view that we dream most fre- 
quently of the things on which our warmest passions are centred. And 
this shows that our passions must have an influence on the production of 
our dreams. The ambitious man dreams of the laurels he has won (or 
imagines he has won) or of those he has still to win; while the lover is bus- 
ied in his dreams with the object of his sweet hopes. . . . All the sensual 
desires and repulsions that slumber in the heart can, if anything sets them 
in motion, cause a dream to arise from the ideas that are associated with 
them or cause those ideas to intervene in a dream that is already present.’ 

The same view was taken in antiquity on the dependence of the con- 
tent of dreams upon waking life. Radestock (1879, 134) tells us how be- 
fore Xerxes started on his expedition against Greece, he was given sound 
advice of a discouraging kind but was always urged on again by his 
dreams; whereupon Artabanus, the sensible old Persian interpreter of 
dreams, observed to him pertinently that as a rule dream-pictures contain 
what the waking man already thinks. 

Lucretius’ didactic poem De rerum natura contains the following pas- 
sage (IV, 962): 

Et quo quisque fere studio devinctus adhaeret aut quibus in 
rebus multum sumus ante morati atque in ea ratione fuit 
contenta magis mens, in somnis eadem plerumque videmur 


1 [‘We dream of what we have seen, said, desired or done.’] 

1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.] 




A. Dreams and Waking Life 


43 


cbire; causidici causas agere et componere leges, indupera- 
tores pugnare ac proelia obire ... 1 

Cicero {De divinatione, II, Ixvii, 140) writes to exactly the same effect as 
Maury so many years later: ‘Maximeque reliquiae rerum earum moventur 
in animis et agitantur de quibus vigilantes aut cogitavimus aut egimus.’ 2 

The contradiction between these two views upon the relation between 
dream-life and waking life seems in fact insoluble. It is therefore relevant 
at this point to recall the discussion of the subject by Hildebrandt (1875, 
8 f£), who believes that it is impossible to describe the characteristics of 
dreams at all except by means of ‘a series of [three] contrasts which seem 
to sharpen into contradictions.’ The first of these contrasts,’ he writes, ‘is 
afforded on the one hand by the completeness with which dreams are se- 
cluded and separated from real and actual life and on the other hand by 
their constant encroachment upon each other and their constant mutual 
dependence. A dream is something completely severed from the reality 
experienced in waking life, something, as one might say, with an hermet- 
ically sealed existence of its own, and separated from real life by an im- 
passable gulf. It sets us free from reality, extinguishes our normal memory 
of it and places us in another world and in a quite other life-story which 
in essentials has nothing to do with our real one. . . . ’ Hildebrandt goes 
on to show how when we fall asleep our whole being with all its forms of 
existence ‘disappears, as it were, through an invisible trap-door.’ Then, 
perhaps, the dreamer may make a sea-voyage to St. Helena in order to of- 
fer Napoleon, who is a prisoner there, a choice bargain in Moselle wines. 
He is received most affably by the ex-Emperor and feels almost sorry 
when he wakes and the interesting illusion is destroyed. But let us com- 
pare the situation in the dream, proceeds Hildebrandt, with reality. The 


1 [‘And whatever be the pursuit to which one clings with devotion, whatever the 
things on which we have been occupied much in the past, the mind being thus 
more intent upon that pursuit, it is generally the same things that we seem to 
encounter in dreams: pleaders to plead their cause and collate laws, generals to 
contend and engage battle . . . (Rouse’s translation in the Loeb Classical Li- 
brary, 1924, 317.)] 

2 [‘Then especially do the remnants of our waking thoughts and deeds move and 
stir within the soul.’ (Falconer’s translation in the Loeb Classical Library, 1922, 
527.)] 




44 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


dreamer has never been a wine-merchant and has never wished to be. He 
has never gone on a sea-voyage, and if he did, St. Helena would be the 
last place he would choose to go to. He nourishes no sympathetic feelings 
whatever towards Napoleon, but on the contrary a fierce patriotic hatred. 
And, on top of all the rest, the dreamer was not even born when Napo- 
leon died on the island; so that to have any personal relations with him 
was beyond the bounds of possibility. Thus the dream-experience appears 
as something alien inserted between two sections of life which are per- 
fectly continuous and consistent with each other. 

‘And yet,’ continues Hildebrandt [ibid., 10], ‘What appears to be the 
contrary of this is equally true and correct. In spite of everything, the 
most intimate relationship goes hand in hand, I believe, with the seclu- 
sion and separation. We may even go so far as to say that whatever dreams 
may offer, they derive their material from reality and from the intellectual 
life that revolves around that reality. . . . Whatever strange results they 
may achieve, they can never in fact get free from the real world; and their 
most sublime as well as their most ridiculous structures must always bor- 
row their basic material either from what has passed before our eyes in the 
world of the senses or from what has already found a place somewhere in 
the course of our waking thoughts — in other words from what we have 
already experienced either externally or internally.’ 


(B) 

THE MATERIAL OF DREAMS— MEMORY IN DREAMS 

AH the material making up the content of a dream is in some way de- 
rived from experience, that is to say, has been reproduced or remembered 
in the dream — so much at least we may regard as an undisputed fact. But 
it would be a mistake to suppose that a connection of this kind between 
the content of a dream and reality is bound to come to light easily, as an 
immediate result of comparing them. The connection requires, on the 
contrary, to be looked for diligently, and in a whole quantity of cases it 
may long remain hidden. The reason for this lies in a number of peculi- 
arities which are exhibited by the faculty of memory in dreams and 
which, though generally remarked upon, have hitherto resisted explana- 
tion. It will be worth while to examine these characteristics more closely. 



B. Memory in Dreams 


45 


It may happen that a piece of material occurs in the content of a 
dream which in the waking state we do not recognize as forming a part 
of our knowledge or experience. We remember, of course, having dreamt 
the thing in question, but we cannot remember whether or when we ex- 
perienced it in real life. We are thus left in doubt as to the source which 
has been drawn upon by the dream and are tempted to believe that 
dreams have a power of independent production. Then at last, often after 
a long interval, some fresh experience recalls the lost memory of the other 
event and at the same time reveals the source of the dream. We are thus 
driven to admit that in the dream we knew and remembered something 
which was beyond the reach of our waking memory. 1 

A particularly striking example of this is given by Delboeuf [1885, 
1 07 ff.] from his own experience. He saw in a dream the courtyard of his 
house covered with snow and found two small lizards half-frozen and 
buried under it. Being an animal-lover, he picked them up, warmed them, 
and carried them back to the little hole in the masonry where they be- 
longed. He further gave them a few leaves of a small fern which grew on 
the wall and of which, as he knew, they were very fond. In the dream he 
knew the name of the plant: Asplenium ruta muralis. The dream pro- 
ceeded and, after a digression, came back to the lizards. Delboeuf then saw 
to his astonishment two new ones which were busy on the remains of the 
fern. He then looked round him and saw a fifth and then a sixth lizard 
making their way to the hole in the wall, until the whole roadway was 
filled with a procession of lizards, all moving in the same direction . . . and 
so on. 

When he was awake, Delboeuf knew the Latin names of very few 
plants and an Asplenium was not among them. To his great surprise he 
was able to confirm the fact that a fern of this name actually exists. Its 
correct name is Asplenium ruta muraria, which had been slightly distorted 
in the dream. It was hardly possible that this could be a coincidence; and 
it remained a mystery to Delboeuf how he had acquired his knowledge of 
the name Asplenium in his dream. 

The dream occurred in 1862. Sixteen years later, while the philosopher 
was on a visit to one of his friends, he saw a little album of pressed flowers of 
the sort that are sold to foreigners as mementos in some parts of Switzerland. 


\Footnote added 1914:] Vaschide (1911) remarks that it has often been observed 
that in dreams people speak foreign languages more fluently and correctly than 
in waking life. 




46 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 

A recollection began to dawn on him — he opened the herbarium, found the 
Asplenium of his dream and saw its Latin name written underneath it in his 
own handwriting. The facts could now be established. In 1860 (two years 
before the lizard dream) a sister of this same friend had visited Delboeuf on 
her honeymoon. She had with her the album, which was to be a gift to her 
brother, and Delboeuf took the trouble to write its Latin name under each 
dried plant, at the dictation of a botanist. 

Good luck, which made this example so well worth recording, enabled 
Delboeuf to trace yet another part of the content of the dream to its for- 
gotten source. One day in 1877 he happened to take up an old volume 
of an illustrated periodical and in it he found a picture of the whole pro- 
cession of lizards which he had dreamed of in 1862. The volume was 
dated 1861 and Delboeuf remembered having been a subscriber to the 
paper from its first number. 

The fact that dreams have at their command memories which are in- 
accessible in waking life is so remarkable and of such theoretical impor- 
tance that I should like to draw still more attention to it by relating some 
further ‘hypermnesic’ dreams. Maury [1878, 142] tells us how for some 
time the word ‘Mussidan’ kept coming into his head during the day. He 
knew nothing about it except that it was the name of a town in France. 
One night he dreamt that he was talking to someone who told him he 
came from Mussidan, and who, on being asked where that was, replied 
that it was a small town in the Department of Dordogne. When he woke 
up, Maury had no belief in the information given him in the dream; he 
learnt from a gazetteer, however, that it was perfectly correct. In this case 
the fact of the dream’s superior knowledge was confirmed, but the forgot- 
ten source of that knowledge was not discovered. 

Jessen (1855, 551) reports a very similar event in a dream dating from 
remoter times: ‘To this class belongs among others a dream of the elder 
Scaliger (quoted by Hennings, 1784, 300) who wrote a poem in praise of 
the famous men of Verona. A man who called himself Brugnolus ap- 
peared to him in a dream and complained that he had been overlooked. 
Although Scaliger could not remember having ever heard of him, he 
wrote some verses on him. His son learnt later in Verona that someone 
named Brugnolus had in fact been celebrated there as a critic.’ 

The Marquis d’Hervey de St. Denys [1867, 305], 1 quoted by Vaschide 
(191 1, 232 f.), describes a hypermnesic dream which has a special pecu- 


1 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1914.] 



B. Memory in Dreams 


47 


liarity, for it was followed by another dream which completed the recog- 
nition of what was at first an unidentified memory: ‘I once dreamt of a 
young woman with golden hair, whom I saw talking to my sister while 
showing her some embroidery. She seemed very familiar to me in the 
dream and I thought I had seen her very often before. After I woke up, 1 
still had her face very clearly before me but I was totally unable to recog- 
nize it. I then went to sleep once more and the dream-picture was re- 
peated. . . . But in this second dream I spoke to the fair-haired lady and 
asked her if I had not had the pleasure of meeting her before somewhere. 
“Of course,” she replied, “don’t you remember the plage at Pornic?” 1 im- 
mediately woke up again and I was then able to recollect clearly all the 
details associated with the attractive vision in the dream.’ 

The same author [ibid., 306] (quoted again by Vaschide, ibid., 233-4) 
tells how a musician of his acquaintance once heard in a dream a tune 
which seemed to him entirely new. It was not until several years later that 
he found the same tune in an old collected volume of musical pieces, 
though he still could not remember ever having looked through it before. 

I understand that Myers [1892] has published a whole collection of 
hypermnesic dreams of this kind in the Proceedings of the Society for Psy- 
chical Research; but these are unluckily inaccessible to me. 

No one who occupies himself with dreams can , I believe, fail to discover 
that it is a very common event for a dream to give evidence of knowledge 
and memories which the waking subject is unaware of possessing. In my 
psycho-analytic work with nervous patients, of which I shall speak later, I 
am in a position several times a week to prove to patients from their dreams 
that they are really quite familiar with quotations, obscene words and so on, 
and make use of them in their dreams, though they have forgotten them in 
their waking life. I will add one more innocent case of hypermnesia in a 
dream, because of the great ease with which it was possible to trace the 
source of the knowledge that was accessible only in the dream. 

One of my patients dreamt in the course of a fairly lengthy dream that 
he had ordered a ‘ Kontuszowkd while he was in a cafe. After telling me 
this, he asked me what a ‘ Kontuszowkd was, as he had never heard the 
name. I was able to tell him in reply that it was a Polish liqueur, and that 
he could not have invented the name as it had long been familiar to me 
from advertisements on the hoardings. At first he would not believe me; 
but some days later, after making his dream come true in a cafe, he noticed 
the name on a hoarding at a street corner which he must have gone past at 
least twice a day for several months. 



48 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 

I have noticed myself 1 from my own dreams how much it is a matter 
of chance whether one discovers the source of particular elements of a 
dream. Thus, for several years before completing this book, I was pursued 
by the picture of a church tower of very simple design, which I could not 
remember ever having seen. Then I suddenly recognized it, with absolute 
certainty, at a small station on the line between Salzburg and Reichenhall. 
That was during the second half of the eighteen-nineties and I had trav- 
elled over the line for the first time in 1886. During later years, when I 
was already deeply absorbed in the study of dreams, the frequent recur- 
rence in my dreams of the picture of a particular unusual-looking place 
became a positive nuisance to me. In a specific spatial relation to myself, 
on my left-hand side, I saw a dark space out of which there glimmered a 
number of grotesque sandstone figures. A faint recollection, which I was 
unwilling to credit, told me it was the entrance to a beer-cellar. But I 
failed to discover either the meaning of the dream-picture or its origin. In 
1 907 I happened to be in Padua, which, to my regret, I had not been able 
to visit since 1895. My first visit to that lovely University town had been 
a disappointment, as I had not been able to see Giotto’s frescoes in the 
Madonna dell’ Arena. I had turned back hallway along the street leading 
there, on being told that the chapel was closed on that particular day. On 
my second visit, twelve years later, I decided to make up for this and the 
first thing I did was to set off towards the Arena chapel. In the street lead- 
ing to it, on my left-hand side as I walked along and in all probability at 
the point at which I had turned back in 1895, 1 came upon the place I 
had seen so often in my dreams, with the sandstone figures that formed 
part of it. It was in fact the entrance to the garden of a restaurant. 

One of the sources from which dreams derive material for 
reproduction — material which is in part neither remembered nor used in 
the activities of waking thought — is childhood experience. I will quote 
only a few of the authors who have noticed and stressed this fact. 

Hildebrandt (1875, 23): ‘1 have already expressly admitted that dreams 
sometimes bring back to our minds, with a wonderful power of reproduc- 
tion, very remote and even forgotten events from our earliest years.’ 

Striimpell (1877, 40): ‘The position is even more remarkable when we 
observe how dreams sometimes bring to light, as it were, from beneath 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1909.] 




B. Memory in Dreams 


49 


the deepest piles of debris under which the earliest experiences of youth 
are buried in later times, pictures of particular localities, things or people, 
completely intact and with all their original freshness. This is not limited 
to experiences which created a lively impression when they occurred or 
enjoy a high degree of psychical importance and return later in a dream 
as genuine recollections at which waking consciousness will rejoice. On 
the contrary, the depths of memory in dreams also include pictures of 
people, things, localities and events dating from the earliest times, which 
either never possessed any psychical importance or more than a slight 
degree of vividness, or which have long since lost what they may have 
possessed of either, and which consequently seem completely alien and 
unknown alike to the dreaming and waking mind till their earlier origin 
has been discovered.’ 

Volkelt (1875, 1 19): ‘It is especially remarkable how readily memories 
of childhood and youth make their way into dreams. Dreams are contin- 
ually reminding us of things which we have ceased to think of and which 
have long ceased to be important to us.’ 

Since dreams have material from childhood at their command, and 
since, as we all know, that material is for the most part blotted out by gaps 
in our conscious faculty of memory, these circumstances give rise to inter- 
esting hypermnesic dreams, of which I will once more give a few examples. 

Maury (1878, 92) relates how when he was a child he used often to go 
from Meaux, which was his birthplace, to the neighbouring village of 
Trilport, where his father was superintending the building of a bridge. 
One night in a dream he found himself in Trilport and was once more 
playing in the village street. A man came up to him who was wearing a 
sort of uniform. Maury asked him his name and he replied that he was 
called C. and was a watchman at the bridge. Maury awoke feeling scepti- 
cal as to the correctness of the memory, and asked an old maid-servant, 
who had been with him since his childhood, whether she could remem- 
ber a man of that name. ‘Why, yes,’ was the reply, ‘he was the watchman 
at the bridge when your father was building it.’ 

Maury (ibid., 143-4) gives another equally well corroborated example 
of the accuracy of a memory of childhood emerging in a dream. It was 
dreamt by a Monsieur F., who as a child had lived at Montbrison. Twenty- 
five years after leaving it, he decided to revisit his home and some friends 
of the family whom he had not since met. During the night before his de- 
parture he dreamt that he was already at Montbrison and, near the town, 



50 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


met a gentleman whom he did not know by sight but who told him he 
was Monsieur T., a friend of his father’s. The dreamer was aware that 
when he was a child he had known someone of that name, but in his wak- 
ing state no longer remembered what he looked like. A few days later he 
actually reached Montbrison, found the locality which in his dream had 
seemed unknown to him, and there met a gentleman whom he at once 
recognized as the Monsieur T. in the dream. The real person, however, 
looked much older than he had appeared in the dream. 

At this point I may mention a dream of my own, in which what had to 
be traced was not an impression but a connection. I had a dream of some- 
one who I knew in my dream was the doctor in my native town. His face 
was indistinct, but was confused with a picture of one of the masters at my 
secondary school, whom I still meet occasionally. When I woke up I could 
not discover what connection there was between these two men. I made 
some enquiries from my mother, however, about this doctor who dated 
back to the earliest years of my childhood, and learnt that he had only one 
eye. The schoolmaster whose figure had covered that of the doctor in the 
dream, was also one-eyed. It was thirty-eight years since I had seen the doc- 
tor, and so far as I know 1 had never thought of him in my waking life, 
though a scar on my chin might have reminded me of his attentions. 1 

A number of writers, on the other hand, assert that elements are to be 
found in most dreams, which are derived from the very last few days be- 
fore they were dreamt; and this sounds like an attempt to counterbalance 
the laying of too much weight upon the part played in dream-life by ex- 
periences in childhood. Thus Robert (1886, 46) actually declares that 
normal dreams are as a rule concerned only with the impressions of the 
past few days. We shall find, however, that the theory of dreams con- 
structed by Robert makes it essential for him to bring forward the most 
recent impressions and leave the oldest out of sight. None the less the fact 


1 [The last clause of this sentence was added in 1909, appears in all later editions 
up to 1922, but was afterwards omitted. The reference to this same man on 
p. 292 below only makes sense if it alludes to this omitted clause. The accident 
that caused the scar is mentioned in the disguised autobiographical case history 
in Freud (1899a), and the event itself is probably described below on p. 560. 
This dream plays an important part in a letter to Fliess of October 15, 1897 
(Freud, 1950a, Letter 71); it is also described in Freud, 1916-17, Lecture 13.] 




B. Memory in Dreams 


51 


stated by him remains correct, as I am able to confirm from my own in- 
vestigations. An American writer, Nelson [1888, 380 £], is of the opinion 
that the impressions most frequently employed in a dream arise from the 
day next but one before the dream occurs, or from the day preceding that 
one — as though the impressions of the day immediately before the dream 
were not sufficiently attenuated or remote. 

Several writers who are anxious not to cast doubts on the intimate con- 
nection between the content of dreams and waking life have been struck 
by the fact that impressions with which waking thoughts are intensely oc- 
cupied only appear in dreams after they have been pushed somewhat aside 
by the workings of daytime thought. Thus, after the death of someone 
dear to them, people do not as a rule dream of him to begin with, while 
they are overwhelmed by grief (Delage, 1891, [40]). On the other hand 
one of the most recent observers, Miss Hallam (Hallam and Weed, 1896, 
410-11), has collected instances to the contrary, thus asserting the right of 
each of us to psychological individualism in this respect. 

The third, most striking and least comprehensible characteristic of 
memory in dreams is shown in the choice of material reproduced. For 
what is found worth remembering is not, as in waking life, only what is 
most important, but on the contrary what is most indifferent and in- 
significant as well. On this point I will quote those writers who have 
given the strongest expression to their astonishment. 

Hildebrandt (1875, 11): ‘For the remarkable thing is that dreams de- 
rive their elements not from major and stirring events nor the powerful 
and compelling interests of the preceding day, but from incidental details, 
from the worthless fragments, one might say, of what has been recently 
experienced or of the remoter past. A family bereavement, which has 
moved us deeply and under whose immediate shadow we have fallen 
asleep late at night, is blotted out of our memory till with our first waking 
moment it returns to it again with disturbing violence. On the other 
hand, a wart on the forehead of a stranger whom we met in the street and 
to whom we gave no second thought after passing him has a part to play 
in our dream. 

Striimpell (1877, 39): ‘There are cases in which the analysis of a dream 
shows that some of its components are indeed derived from experiences of 
the previous day or its predecessor, but experiences so unimportant and triv- 
ial from the point of view of waking consciousness that they were forgotten 



52 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


soon after they occurred. Experiences of this kind include, for instance, 
remarks accidentally overheard, or another person’s actions inattentively 
observed, or passing glimpses of people or things, or odd fragments of what 
one has read, and so on.’ 

Havelock Ellis (1899, 727): ‘The profound emotions of waking life, 
the questions and problems on which we spread our chief voluntary men- 
tal energy, are not those which usually present themselves at once to dream 
consciousness. It is, so far as the immediate past is concerned, mostly the 
trifling, the incidental, the “forgotten” impressions of daily life which 
reappear in our dreams. The psychic activities that are awake most in- 
tensely are those that sleep most profoundly.’ 

Binz (1878, 44-5) actually makes this particular peculiarity of mem- 
ory in dreams the occasion for expressing his dissatisfaction with the ex- 
planations of dreams which he himself has supported: ‘And the natural 
dream raises similar problems. Why do we not always dream of the 
mnemic impressions of the day we have just lived through? Why do we 
often, without any apparent motive, plunge instead into the remote and 
almost extinct past? Why does consciousness so often in dreams receive 
the impression of indifferent memory-images, while the brain cells, just 
where they carry the most sensitive marks of what has been experienced, 
lie for the most part silent and still, unless they have been stirred into 
fresh activity shortly before, during waking life?’ 

It is easy to see how the remarkable preference shown by the memory 
in dreams for indifferent, and consequently unnoticed, elements in wak- 
ing experience is bound to lead people to overlook in general the depen- 
dence of dreams upon waking life and at all events to make it difficult in 
any particular instance to prove that dependence. Thus Miss Whiton 
Calkins (1893, 315), in her statistical study of her own and her collabo- 
rator’s dreams, found that in eleven per cent of the total there was no 
visible connection with waking life. Hildebrandt (1875, [12 f.]) is un- 
questionably right in asserting that we should be able to explain the gen- 
esis of every dream-image if we devoted enough time and trouble to 
tracing its origin. He speaks of this as ‘an exceedingly laborious and 
thankless task. For as a rule it ends in hunting out every kind of utterly 
worthless psychical event from the remotest corners of the chambers of 
one’s memory, and in dragging to light once again every kind of com- 
pletely indifferent moment of the past from the oblivion in which it was 
buried in the very hour, perhaps, after it occurred.’ I can only regret that 
this keen-sighted author allowed himself to be deterred from following 



B. Memory in Dreams 


53 


the path which had this inauspicious beginning; if he had followed it, it 
would have led him to the very heart of the explanation of dreams. 

The way in which the memory behaves in dreams is undoubtedly of 
the greatest importance for any theory of memory in general. It teaches 
us that ‘nothing which we have once mentally possessed can be entirely 
lost’ (Scholz, 1893, 59); or, as Delboeuf [1885, 115] puts it, ‘que toute 
impression meme la plus insignihante, laisse une trace inalterable, in- 
definiment susceptible de reparaitre au jour.’ 1 This is a conclusion to 
which we are also driven by many pathological phenomena of mental life. 
Certain theories about dreams which we shall mention later seek to ac- 
count for their absurdity and incoherence by a partial forgetting of what 
we know during the day. When we bear in mind the extraordinary effi- 
ciency that we have just seen exhibited by memory in dreams we shall 
have a lively sense of the contradiction which these theories involve. 

It might perhaps occur to us that the phenomenon of dreaming could 
be reduced entirely to that of memory: dreams, it might be supposed, are a 
manifestation of a reproductive activity which is at work even in the night 
and which is an end in itself. This would tally with statements such as 
those made by Pilcz (1899), according to which there is a fixed relation ob- 
servable between the time at which a dream occurs and its content — 
impressions from the remotest past being reproduced in dreams during 
deep sleep, while more recent impressions appear towards morning. But 
views of this sort are inherently improbable owing to the manner in which 
dreams deal with the material that is to be remembered. Striimpell [1877, 
1 8] rightly points out that dreams do not reproduce experiences. They take 
one step forward, but the next step in the chain is omitted, or appears in 
an altered form, or is replaced by something entirely extraneous. Dreams 
yield no more than fragments of reproductions; and this is so general a rule 
that theoretical conclusions may be based on it. It is true that there are ex- 
ceptional cases in which a dream repeats an experience with as much com- 
pleteness as is attainable by our waking memory. Delboeuf [1885, 239 £] 
tells how one of his university colleagues 2 had a dream which reproduced 


1 [‘That even the most insignificant impression leaves an unalterable trace, which 
is indefinitely capable of revival.’] 

2 [In the first edition the words ‘who is now teaching in Vienna’ appeared here but 
they were cut out in 1909. In Ges. Schr. 3 (1925), 8, Freud remarks that ‘the words 
were no doubt rightly omitted, especially as the man in question had died.’] 




54 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


in all its details a dangerous carriage-accident he had had, with an almost 
miraculous escape. Miss Calkins (1893) mentions two dreams whose con- 
tent was an exact reproduction of an event of the previous day, and I shall 
myself have occasion later to report an example 1 came across of a child- 
hood experience re-appearing in a dream without modification. [See pp. 
212 and 219.] 1 


(C) 

THE STIMULI AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 

There is a popular saying that ‘dreams come from indigestion’ and this 
helps us to see what is meant by the stimuli and sources of dreams. Be- 
hind these concepts lies a theory according to which dreams are a result 
of a disturbance of sleep: we should not have had a dream unless some- 
thing disturbing had happened during our sleep, and the dream was a re- 
action to that disturbance. 

Discussions upon the exciting causes of dreams occupy a very large 
space in the literature of the subject. The problem could obviously only 
arise after dreams had become a subject of biological investigation. The 
ancients, who believed that dreams were inspired by the gods, had no 
need to look around for their stimulus: dreams emanated from the will of 
divine or daemonic powers and their content arose from the knowledge 
or purpose of those powers. Science was immediately faced by the ques- 
tion of whether the stimulus to dreaming was always the same or whether 
there could be many kinds of such stimuli; and this involved the consid- 
eration of whether the explanation of the causation of dreams fell within 
the province of psychology or rather of physiology. Most authorities seem 


1 [ Footnote added 1909:] Subsequent experience leads me to add that it by no 
means rarely happens that innocent and unimportant actions of the previous day 
are repeated in a dream: such, for instance, as packing a trunk, preparing food 
in the kitchen, and so on. What the dreamer is himself stressing in dreams of 
this kind is not, however, the content of the memory but the fact of its being 
‘real’: ‘I really did do all that yesterday.’ [Cf. below pp. 210 and 383 f. The topics 
discussed in this and the preceding section are taken up again in the first two 
sections of Chapter V (pp. 187 ff.) 




C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 


55 


to agree in assuming that the causes that disturb sleep — that is, the 
sources of dreaming — may be of many kinds and that somatic stimuli 
and mental excitations alike may come to act as instigators of dreams. 
Opinions differ widely, however, in the preference they show for one or 
the other source of dreams and in the order of importance which they as- 
sign to them as factors in the production of dreams. 

Any complete enumeration of the sources of dreams leads to a recog- 
nition of four kinds of source; and these have also been used for the clas- 
sification of dreams themselves. They are: (1) external (objective) sensory 
excitations; (2) internal (subjective) sensory excitations; (3) internal (or- 
ganic) somatic stimuli; and (4) purely psychical sources of stimulation. 


1. External Sensory Stimuli 

The younger Striimpell [1883-4; Engl, trans. (1912), 2, 160], the son 
of the philosopher whose book on dreams has already given us several 
hints upon their problems, published a well-known account of his obser- 
vations upon one of his patients who was afflicted with general anaesthesia 
of the surface of his body and paralysis of several of his higher sense organs. 
If the few of this man’s sensory channels which remained open to the ex- 
ternal world were closed, he would fall asleep. Now when we ourselves 
wish to go to sleep we are in the habit of trying to produce a situation sim- 
ilar to that of Striimpell’s experiment. We close our most important sen- 
sory channels, our eyes, and try to protect the other senses from all stimuli 
or from any modification of the stimuli acting on them. We then fall 
asleep, even though our plan is never completely realized. We cannot keep 
stimuli completely away from our sense organs nor can we completely sus- 
pend the excitability of our sense organs. The fact that a fairly powerful 
stimulus will awaken us at any time is evidence that ‘even in sleep the soul 
is in constant contact with the extracorporeal world.’ 1 The sensory stimuli 
that reach us during sleep may very well become sources of dreams. 

Now there are a great number of such stimuli, ranging from the un- 
avoidable ones which the state of sleep itself necessarily involves or must 
tolerate from time to time, to the accidental, rousing stimuli which may 
or do put an end to sleep. A bright light may force its way into our eyes, 


1 [Cf. Burdach’s remarks on p. 82 £] 




56 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


or a noise may make itself heard, or some strong-smelling substance may 
stimulate the mucous membrane of our nose. By unintentional move- 
ments during our sleep we may uncover some part of our body and expose 
it to sensations of chill, or by a change in posture we may ourselves bring 
about sensations of pressure or contact. We may be stung by a gnat, or 
some small mishap during the night may impinge upon several of our 
senses at once. Attentive observers have collected a whole series of dreams 
in which there has been such a far-reaching correspondence between a 
stimulus noticed on waking and a portion of the content of the dream that 
it has been possible to identify the stimulus as the source of the dream. 

I will quote from Jessen (1855, 527 f.) a collection of dreams of this 
kind which may be traced back to objective, and more or less accidental, 
sensory stimulation. 

‘Every noise that is indistinctly perceived arouses corresponding 
dream-images. A peal of thunder will set us in the midst of a battle; the 
crowing of a cock may turn into a man’s cry of terror; the creaking of a 
door may produce a dream of burglars. If our bedclothes fall off in the 
night, we may dream, perhaps, of walking about naked or of falling into 
water. If we are lying crosswise in bed and push our feet over the edge, we 
may dream that we are standing on the brink of a frightful precipice or 
that we are falling over a cliff. If our head happens to get under the pillow, 
we dream of being beneath a huge overhanging rock which is on the 
point of burying us under its weight. Accumulations of semen lead to las- 
civious dreams, local pains produce ideas of being ill-treated, attacked or 
injured. . . . 

‘Meier (1758, 33) once dreamt that he was overpowered by some men 
who stretched him out on his back on the ground and drove a stake into 
the earth between his big toe and the next one. While he was imagining 
this in the dream he woke up and found that a straw was sticking between 
his toes. On another occasion, according to Hennings (1784, 258), when 
Meier had fastened his shirt rather tight round his neck, he dreamt that 
he was being hanged. Hoffbauer [(1796, 146)] dreamt when he was a 
young man of falling down from a high wall, and when he woke up 
found that his bedstead had collapsed and that he had really fallen on to 
the floor. . . . Gregory reports that once, when he was lying with his feet 
on a hot-water bottle, he dreamt he had climbed to the top of Mount 
Etna and that the ground there was intolerably hot. Another man, who 
was sleeping with a hot poultice on his head, dreamt that he was being 
scalped by a band of Red Indians; while a third, who was wearing a damp 



C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 57 

nightshirt, imagined that he was being dragged through a stream. An at- 
tack of gout that came on suddenly during sleep caused the patient to be- 
lieve he was in the hands of the Inquisition and being tortured on the 
rack. (Macnish [1835, 40].)’ 

The argument based on the similarity between the stimulus and the 
content of the dream gains in strength if it is possible deliberately to con- 
vey a sensory stimulus to the sleeper and produce in him a dream corre- 
sponding to that stimulus. According to Macnish (loc. Cit.), quoted by 
Jessen (1855, 529), experiments of this sort had already been made by 
Girou de Buzareingues [1848, 55]. ‘He left his knee uncovered and dreamt 
that he was travelling at night in a mail coach. He remarks upon this that 
travellers will no doubt be aware how cold one’s knees become at night in 
a coach. Another time he left his head uncovered at the back and dreamt 
that he was taking part in a religious ceremony in the open air. It must be 
explained that in the country in which he lived it was the custom always 
to keep the head covered except in circumstances such as these.’ 

Maury (1878, [154-6]) brings forward some new observations of dreams 
produced in himself. (A number of other experiments were unsuccessful.) 

(1) His lips and the tip of his nose were tickled with a feather. — He 
dreamt of a frightful form of torture: a mask made of pitch was placed on 
his face and then pulled off, so that it took his skin off with it. 

(2) A pair of scissors was sharpened on a pair of pliers. — He heard 
bells pealing, followed by alarm-bells, and he was back in the June days 
of 1848. 

(3) He was given some eau-de-cologne to smell. — He was in Cairo, 
in Johann Maria Farina’s shop. Some absurd adventures followed, which 
he could not reproduce. 

(4) He was pinched lightly on the neck. — He dreamt he was being 
given a mustard plaster and thought of the doctor who had treated him 
as a child. 

(5) A hot iron was brought close to his face. — He dreamt that the 
‘ chauffeurs 1 had made their way into the house and were forcing its in- 
habitants to give up their money by sticking their feet into braziers of hot 
coal. The Duchess of Abrantes, whose secretary he was in the dream, then 
appeared. 


1 The ' chauffeurs [heaters] were bands of robbers in La Vendee [at the time of the 
French Revolution], who made use of the method of torture described above. 




58 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


(8) A drop of water was dropped on his forehead. — He was in Italy, 
was sweating violently and was drinking white Orvieto wine. 

(9) Light from a candle was repeatedly shone upon him through a 
sheet of red paper. — He dreamt of the weather and of the heat, and was 
once again in a storm he had experienced in the English Channel. 

Other attempts at producing dreams experimentally have been re- 
ported by Hervey de Saint-Denys [1867, 268 f. and 376 £], Weygandt 
(1893) and others. 

Many writers have commented upon ‘the striking facility with which 
dreams are able to weave a sudden impression from the world of the 
senses into their own structure so that it comes as what appears to be a 
pre-arranged catastrophe that has been gradually led up to.’ (Hildebrandt, 
1875, [36].) ‘In my youth,’ this author goes on, ‘I used to make use of an 
alarm-clock in order to be up regularly at a fixed hour. It must have hap- 
pened hundreds of times that the noise produced by this instrument fit- 
ted into an ostensibly lengthy and connected dream as though the whole 
dream had been leading up to that one event and had reached its ap- 
pointed end in what was a logically indispensable climax.’ [Ibid., 37.] 

I shall quote three of these alarm-clock dreams presently in another 
connection. [Pp. 60.] 

Volkelt (1875, 108 f.) writes: ‘A composer once dreamt that he was 
giving a class and was trying to make a point clear to his pupils. When he 
had done, he turned to one of the boys and asked him if he had followed. 
The boy shouted back like a lunatic: “Oh ja! [Oh yes!]” He began to re- 
prove the boy angrily for shouting, but the whole class broke out into 
cries first of “Orja!,” then of “Eurjo!” and finally of “Feuerjo!” 1 At this 
point he was woken up by actual cries of “Feuerjo!” in the street.’ 

Gamier (1865, [1, 476]) tells how Napoleon I was woken by a bomb 
explosion while he was asleep in his carriage. He had a dream that he was 
once more crossing the Tagliamento under the Austrian bombardment, 
and at last started up with a cry: ‘We are undermined!’ 2 

A dream dreamt by Maury (1878, 161) has become famous. He was 
ill and lying in his room in bed, with his mother sitting beside him, and 
dreamt that it was during the Reign of Terror. After witnessing a number 
of frightful scenes of murder, he was finally himself brought before the 


1 [The first two of these last three exclamations are meaningless; the third is the 
conventional cry for an alarm of fire.] 

1 [Further considered below on pp. 252 f. and 501 £] 




C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 59 

revolutionary tribunal. There he saw Robespierre, Marat, Fouquier- 
Tinville and the rest of the grim heroes of those terrible days. He was 
questioned by them, and, after a number of incidents which were not re- 
tained in his memory, was condemned, and led to the place of execution 
surrounded by an immense mob. He climbed on to the scaffold and was 
bound to the plank by the executioner. It was tipped up. The blade of the 
guillotine fell. He felt his head being separated from his body, woke up in 
extreme anxiety — and found that the top of the bed had fallen down and 
had struck his cervical vertebrae just in the way in which the blade of the 
guillotine would actually have struck them. 

This dream was the basis of an interesting discussion between Le Lor- 
rain (1894) and Egger (1895) in the Revue philosophique. The question 
raised was whether and how it was possible for a dreamer to compress such 
an apparently superabundant quantity of material into the short period 
elapsing between his perceiving the rousing stimulus and his waking. 1 

Examples of this kind leave an impression that of all the sources of 
dreams the best confirmed are objective sensory stimuli during sleep. 
Moreover they are the only sources whatever taken into account by lay- 
men. If an educated man, who is unacquainted with the literature of 
dreams, is asked how dreams arise, he will infallibly answer with a refer- 
ence to some instance he has come across in which a dream was explained 
by an objective sensory stimulus discovered after waking. Scientific en- 
quiry, however, cannot stop there. It finds an occasion for further ques- 
tions in the observed fact that the stimulus which impinges on the senses 
during sleep does not appear in the dream in its real shape but is replaced 
by another image in some way related to it. But the relation connecting 
the stimulus of the dream to the dream which is its result is, to quote 
Maury’s words (1854, 72), ‘une affinite quelconque, mais qui n’est pas 
unique et exclusive.’ 2 Let us consider in this connection three of Hilde- 
brandt’s alarm-clock dreams (1875, 37 £). The question they raise is why 
the same stimulus should have provoked three such different dreams and 
why it should have provoked these rather than any other. 

‘I dreamt, then, that one spring morning I was going for a walk and 
was strolling through the green fields till I came to a neighbouring village, 
where I saw the villagers in their best clothes, with hymn-books under 


1 [Further discussed below, pp. 93 and 500 f.] 

2 [‘An affinity of some kind, but one which is not unique and exclusive.’] 




60 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


their arms, flocking to the church. Of course! It was Sunday, and early 
morning service would soon be beginning. I decided I would attend it; 
but first, as I was rather hot from walking, I went into the churchyard 
which surrounded the church, to cool down. While I was reading some 
of the tombstones, I heard the bell-ringer climbing up the church tower 
and at the top of it I now saw the little village bell which would presently 
give the signal for the beginning of devotions. For quite a while it hung 
there motionless, then it began to swing, and suddenly its peal began to 
ring out clear and piercing — so clear and piercing that it put an end to 
my sleep. But what was ringing was the alarm-clock. 

‘Here is another instance. It was a bright winter’s day and the streets 
were covered with deep snow. I had agreed to join a party for a sleigh- 
ride; but I had to wait a long time before news came that the sleigh was 
at the door. Now followed the preparations for getting in — the fur rug 
spread out, the foot-muff put ready — and at last I was sitting in my seat. 
But even then the moment of departure was delayed till a pull at the reins 
gave the waiting horses the signal. Then off they started, and, with a vio- 
lent shake, the sleigh bells broke into their familiar jingle — with such vi- 
olence, in fact, that in a moment the cobweb of my dream was torn 
through. And once again it was only the shrill sound of the alarm-clock. 

‘And now yet a third example. I saw a kitchen-maid, carrying several 
dozen plates piled on one another, walking along the passage to the dining- 
room. The column of china in her arms seemed to me in danger of losing 
its balance. “Take care,” I exclaimed, “or you’ll drop the whole load.” The 
inevitable rejoinder duly followed: she was quite accustomed to that kind 
of job, and so on. And meanwhile my anxious looks followed the advanc- 
ing figure. Then — just as I expected — she stumbled at the threshold and 
the fragile crockery slipped and rattled and clattered in a hundred pieces 
on the floor. But the noise continued without ceasing, and soon it seemed 
no longer to be a clattering; it was turning into a ringing — and the ring- 
ing, as my waking self now became aware, was only the alarm-clock doing 
its duty.’ 

The question of why the mind mistakes the nature of objective sen- 
sory stimuli in dreams receives almost the same answer from Striimpell 
(1877, [103]) as from Wundt (1874, [659 f.]): the mind receives stimuli 
that reach it during sleep under conditions favourable to the formation of 
illusions. A sense-impression is recognized by us and correctly interpreted — 
that is, it is placed in the group of memories to which, in accordance with 
all our previous experiences, it belongs — provided the impression is suf- 



C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 


61 


ficiently strong, clear and lasting and provided we have sufficient time at 
our disposal for considering the matter. If these conditions are not ful- 
filled, we mistake the object which is the source of the impression: we 
form an illusion about it. ‘If someone goes for a walk in the open country 
and has an indeterminate perception of a distant object, he may at first 
believe it to be a horse.’ On a closer view he may be led to interpret it as 
a cow lying down, and the image may finally resolve itself definitely into 
a group of people sitting on the ground. The impressions received by the 
mind from external stimuli during sleep are of a similarly indeterminate 
nature; and on their basis the mind forms illusions, since a greater or 
smaller number of memory-images are aroused by the impression and 
it is through them that it acquires its psychical value. From which of the 
many groups of memories concerned the related images shall be aroused 
and which of the possible associative connections shall accordingly 
be put into action — these questions too, on Striimpell’s theory, are in- 
determinable and are, as it were, left open to the arbitrary decision of 
the mind. 

At this point we are faced with a choice between two alternatives. We 
may admit it as a fact that it is impossible to follow the laws governing 
the formation of dreams any further; and we may accordingly refrain 
from enquiring whether there may not be other determinants governing 
the interpretation put by the dreamer upon the illusion called up by the 
sense-impression. Or, on the other hand, we may have a suspicion that 
the sensory stimulus which impinges on the sleeper plays only a modest 
part in generating his dream and that other factors determine the choice 
of the memory-images which are to be aroused in him. In fact, if we ex- 
amine Maury’s experimentally produced dreams (which I have related in 
such detail for this very reason), we shall be tempted to say that the ex- 
periment in fact accounts for the origin of only one element of the 
dreams; the rest of their content seems too self-contained, too definite in 
its details, to be explicable solely by the necessity for fitting in with the el- 
ement experimentally introduced from outside. Indeed, one begins to 
have doubts about the illusion theory and about the power of objective 
impressions to give a shape to dreams when one finds that those impres- 
sions are sometimes subjected in dreams to the most peculiar and far- 
fetched interpretations. Thus Simon (1888) tells us of a dream in which 
he saw some gigantic figures seated at table and clearly heard the frightful 
snapping noise made by their jaws coming together as they chewed. 



62 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


When he awoke he heard the beat of a horse’s hooves galloping past his 
window. The noise made by the horse’s hooves may have suggested ideas 
from a group of memories connected with Gulliver’s Travels — the giants 
of Brobdingnag and the virtuous Houyhnhnms — if I may venture on an 
interpretation without the dreamer’s assistance. Is it not probable, then, 
that the choice of such an unusual group of memories as these was facili- 
tated by motives other than the objective stimulus alone? 1 


2. Internal (Subjective) Sensory Excitations 

In spite of any objections to the contrary, it has to be admitted that 
the part played by objective sensory excitations during sleep in provoking 
dreams remains indisputable. And if such stimuli may appear, from their 
nature and frequency, insufficient to explain every dream-image, we shall 
be encouraged to seek for other sources of dreams analogous to them in 
their operation. 1 cannot say when the idea first cropped up of taking in- 
ternal (subjective) excitations of the sense organs into account alongside 
of the external sensory stimuli. It is, however, the case that this is done, 
more or less explicitly, in all the more recent discussions of the aetiology 
of dreams. ‘An essential part is also played, I believe,’ writes Wundt 
(1874, 657), ‘in the production of the illusions that occur in dreams by 
the subjective visual and auditory sensations which are familiar to us in 
the waking state as the formless areas of luminosity which become visible 
to us when our field of vision is darkened, as ringing or buzzing in the 
ears, and so on. Especially important among these are the subjective exci- 
tations of the retina. It is in this way that is to be explained the remark- 
able tendency of dreams to conjure up before the eyes similar or identical 
objects in large numbers. We see before us innumerable birds or butter- 
flies or fishes or coloured beads or flowers, etc. Here the luminous dust in 
the darkened field of vision has taken on a fantastic shape, and the nu- 
merous specks of which it consists are incorporated into the dream as an 


1 [Footnote added 1911:] The appearance of gigantic figures in a dream gives 
grounds for supposing that some scene from the dreamer’s childhood is involved 
[Cf. p. 417 .] — [ Added 1925:] Incidentally, the interpretation given in the text, 
pointing to a reminiscence of Gulliver’s Travels , is a good example of what an in- 
terpretation ought not to be. The interpreter of a dream should not give free 
play to his own ingenuity and neglect the dreamer’s associations. 




C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 


63 


equal number of separate images; and these, on account of their mobility, 
are regarded as moving objects. — This is no doubt also the basis of the 
great fondness shown by dreams for animal figures of every sort; for the 
immense variety of such forms can adjust itself easily to the particular 
form assumed by the subjective luminous images.’ 

As sources of dream-images, subjective sensory excitations have the ob- 
vious advantage of not being dependent, like objective ones, upon external 
chance. They are ready to hand, as one might say, whenever they are 
needed as an explanation. But they are at a disadvantage compared with 
objective sensory stimuli in that the part they play in instigating a dream 
is scarcely or not at all open to confirmation, as is the case with objective 
stimuli, by observation and experiment. The chief evidence in favour of 
the power of subjective sensory excitations to instigate dreams is provided 
by what are known as ‘hypnagogic hallucinations,’ or, to use Johannes 
Muller’s term (1826), ‘imaginative visual phenomena.’ These are images, 
often very vivid and rapidly changing, which are apt to appear — quite ha- 
bitually in some people — during the period of falling asleep; and they may 
also persist for a time after the eyes have been opened. Maury, who was 
subject to them in a high degree, has made an exhaustive examination of 
them and maintains (as did Muller [ibid., 49 £] before him) their connec- 
tion and indeed their identity with dream-images. In order to produce 
them, he says (Maury, 1878, 59 f.), a certain amount of mental passivity, 
a relaxation of the strain of attention, is necessary. It is enough, however, 
to fall into a lethargic state of this kind for no more than a second (pro- 
vided that one has the necessary predisposition) in order to have a hypna- 
gogic hallucination. After this one may perhaps wake up again and the 
process may be repeated several times until one finally falls asleep. Maury 
found that if he then woke up once more after not too long an interval, he 
was able to detect in his dream the same images that had floated before his 
eyes as hypnagogic hallucinations before he fell asleep. (Ibid., 134 f.) This 
was the case on one occasion with a number of grotesque figures with dis- 
torted faces and strange coiffiires which pestered him with extreme perti- 
nacity while he was going to sleep and which he remembered having 
dreamt about after he woke. Another time, when he was suffering from 
hunger owing to having put himself on a light diet, he had a hypnagogic 
vision of a plate and a hand armed with a fork which was helping itself to 
some of the food from the plate. In the dream which followed he was sit- 
ting at a well-spread table and heard the noise made by the diners with 
their forks. Yet another time, when he went to sleep with his eyes in an 



64 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


irritated and painful state, he had a hypnagogic hallucination of some mi- 
croscopically small signs which he could only decipher one by one with 
the greatest difficulty, he was woken from his sleep an hour later and re- 
membered a dream in which there was an open book printed in very small 
type which he was reading painfully. 

Auditory hallucinations of words, names, and so on can also occur 
hypnagogically in the same way as visual images, and may then be re- 
peated in a dream — just as an overture announces the principal themes 
which are to be heard in the opera that is to follow. 

A more recent observer of hypnagogic hallucinations, G. Trumbull 
Ladd (1892), has followed the same lines as Muller and Maury. After 
some practice he succeeded in being able to wake himself suddenly with- 
out opening his eyes, from two to five minutes after gradually falling 
asleep. He thus had an opportunity of comparing the retinal sensations 
which were just disappearing with the dream-images persisting in his 
memory. He declares that it was possible in every case to recognize an in- 
ternal relation between the two, for the luminous points and lines of the 
idioretinal light provided, as it were, an outline drawing or diagram of the 
figures mentally perceived in the dream. For instance, an arrangement of 
the luminous points in the retina in parallel lines corresponded to a 
dream in which he had been seeing, clearly spread out in front of him, 
some lines of print which he was engaged in reading. Or, to use his own 
words, ‘the clearly printed page which I was reading in my dream faded 
away into an object that appeared to my waking consciousness like a sec- 
tion of an actual page of print when seen through an oval hole in a piece 
of paper at too great a distance to distinguish more than an occasional 
fragment of a word, and even that dimly.’ Ladd is of the opinion (though 
he does not underestimate the part played in the phenomenon by central 
[cerebral] factors) that scarcely a single visual dream occurs without the 
participation of material provided by intraocular retinal excitation. This 
applies especially to dreams occurring soon after falling asleep in a dark 
room, while the source of stimulus for dreams occurring in the morning 
shortly before waking is the objective light which penetrates the eyes in a 
room that is growing light. The changing, perpetually shifting character 
of the excitation of the idioretinal light corresponds precisely to the con- 
stantly moving succession of images shown us by our dreams. No one 
who attaches importance to these observations of Ladd’s will underesti- 
mate the part played in dreams by these subjective sources of stimulation, 
for, as we know, visual images constitute the principal component of our 



C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 


65 


dreams. The contributions from the other senses, except for that of hear- 
ing, are intermittent and of less importance. 


3. Internal Organic Somatic Stimuli 

Since we are now engaged in looking for sources of dreams inside the 
organism instead of outside it, we must bear in mind that almost all our 
internal organs, though they give us scarcely any news of their working so 
long as they are in a healthy state, become a source of what are mainly 
distressing sensations when they are in what we describe as states of exci- 
tation, or during illnesses. These sensations must be equated with the sen- 
sory or painful stimuli reaching us from the outside. The experience of 
ages is reflected in — to take an example — Striimpell’s remarks on the sub- 
ject (1877, 107): ‘During sleep the mind attains a far deeper and wider 
sensory consciousness of somatic events than during the waking state. It 
is obliged to receive and be affected by impressions of stimuli from parts 
of the body and from changes in the body of which it knows nothing 
when awake.’ So early a writer as Aristotle regarded it as quite possible 
that the beginnings of an illness might make themselves felt in dreams be- 
fore anything could be noticed of it in waking life, owing to the magni- 
fying effect produced upon impressions by dreams. (See above, p. 37.) 
Medical writers, too, who were certainly far from believing in the 
prophetic power of dreams, have not disputed their significance as pre- 
monitors of illness. (Cf. Simon, 1888, 31, and many earlier writers. 1 ) 


1 [ Foomote added 1914:] Apart from the diagnostic value ascribed to dreams (e.g. in 
the works of Hippocrates [see above p. 37 n. 2]), their therapeutic importance in 
antiquity must also be borne in mind. In Greece there were dream oracles, which 
were regularly visited by patients in search of recovery. A sick man would enter the 
temple of Apollo or Aesculapius, would perform various ceremonies there, would 
be purified by lustration, massage and incense, and then, in a state of exaltation, 
would be stretched on the skin of a ram that had been sacrificed. He would then 
fall asleep and would dream of the remedies for his illness. These would be re- 
vealed to him either in their natural form or in symbols and pictures which would 
afterwards be interpreted by the priests. For further information upon therapeutic 
dreams among the Greeks see Lehmann (1908, 1, 74), Bouche-Leclercq (1879- 
1882), Hermann (1858, §41, 262 ffi, and 1882, §38, 356), Bottinger (1795, 
163 ffi), Lloyd (1877), Dollinger (1857, 130). — [A comment on the ‘diagnostic’ 
value of dreams will be found near the beginning of Freud, 1917d.] 




66 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


Instances of the diagnostic power of dreams seem to be vouched for in 
more recent times. Thus Tissie (1898, 62 f.) quotes from Artigues (1884, 
43) the story of a forty-three-year-old woman, who, while apparently in 
perfect health, was for some years tormented by anxiety-dreams. She was 
then medically examined and found to be in the early stages of an affec- 
tion of the heart, to which she eventually succumbed. 

Pronounced disorders of the internal organs obviously act as instiga- 
tors of dreams in a whole number of cases. The frequency of anxiety- 
dreams in diseases of the heart and lungs is generally recognized. Indeed, 
this side of dream-life is placed in the foreground by so many authorities 
that I am content with a mere reference to the literature: Radestock 
[1879, 70], Spitta [1882, 241 £], Maury [1878, 33 £], Simon (1888), 
Tissie [1898, 60 ff.]. Tissie is even of the opinion that the particular or- 
gan affected gives a characteristic impress to the content of the dream. 
Thus the dreams of those suffering from diseases of the heart are usually 
short and come to a terrifying end at the moment of waking; their con- 
tent almost always includes a situation involving a horrible death. Suffer- 
ers from diseases of the lungs dream of suffocation, crowding and fleeing, 
and are remarkably subject to the familiar nightmare. (It may be re- 
marked, incidentally, that Borner (1855) has succeeded in provoking the 
latter experimentally by lying on his face or covering the respiratory aper- 
tures.) In the case of digestive disorders dreams contain ideas connected 
with enjoyment of food or disgust. Finally, the influence of sexual excite- 
ment on the content of dreams can be adequately appreciated by every- 
one from his own experience and provides the theory that dreams are 
instigated by organic stimuli with its most powerful support. 

No one, moreover, who goes through the literature of the subject can 
fail to notice that some writers, such as Maury [1878, 451 £] and Wey- 
gandt (1893), were led to the study of dream problems by the effect of 
their own illnesses upon the content of their dreams. 

Nevertheless, though these facts are established beyond a doubt, their 
importance for the study of the sources of dreams is not so great as might 
have been hoped. Dreams are phenomena which occur in healthy 
people — perhaps in everyone, perhaps every night — and it is obvious that 
organic illness cannot be counted among its indispensable conditions. And 
what we are concerned with is not the origin of certain special dreams but 
the source that instigates the ordinary dreams of normal people. 

We need only go a step further, however, in order to come upon a 
source of dreams more copious than any we have so far considered, one 



C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 


67 


indeed which seems as though it could never run dry. If it is established 
that the interior of the body when it is in a diseased state becomes a 
source of stimuli for dreams, and if we admit that during sleep the mind, 
being diverted from the external world, is able to pay more attention to 
the interior of the body, then it seems plausible to suppose that the inter- 
nal organs do not need to be diseased before they can cause excitations 
to reach the sleeping mind — excitations which are somehow turned into 
dream-images. While we are awake we are aware of a diffuse general sen- 
sibility or coenaesthesia, but only as a vague quality of our mood; to this 
feeling, according to medical opinion, all the organic systems contribute 
a share. At night, however, it would seem that this same feeling, grown 
into a powerful influence and acting through its various components, be- 
comes the strongest and at the same time the commonest source for in- 
stigating dream-images. If this is so, it would only remain to investigate 
the laws according to which the organic stimuli turn into dream-images. 

We have here reached the theory of the origin of dreams which is pre- 
ferred by all the medical authorities. The obscurity in which the centre of 
our being (the ‘ moi splanchnique ,’ as Tissie [1898, 23] calls it) is veiled 
from our knowledge and the obscurity surrounding the origin of dreams 
tally too well not to be brought into relation to each other. The line of 
thought which regards vegetative organic sensation as the constructor of 
dreams has, moreover, a particular attraction for medical men since it al- 
lows of a single aetiology for dreams and mental diseases, whose manifes- 
tations have so much in common; for coenaesthetic changes and stimuli 
arising from the internal organs are also held largely responsible for the 
origin of the psychoses. It is not surprising, therefore, that the origin of 
the theory of somatic stimulation may be traced back to more than one 
independent source. 

The line of argument developed by the philosopher Schopenhauer in 
1851 has had a decisive influence on a number of writers. Our picture of 
the universe, in his view, is arrived at by our intellect taking the impres- 
sions that impinge on it from outside and remoulding them into the 
forms of time, space and causality. During the daytime the stimuli from 
the interior of the organism, from the sympathetic nervous system, exer- 
cise at the most an unconscious effect upon our mood. But at night, when 
we are no longer deafened by the impressions of the day, those which arise 
from within are able to attract attention — just as at night we can hear the 
murmuring of a brook which is drowned by daytime noises. But how is 
the intellect to react to these stimuli otherwise than by carrying out its 



68 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


own peculiar function on them? The stimuli are accordingly remodelled 
into forms occupying space and time and obeying the rules of causality, 
and thus dreams arise [cf. Schopenhauer, 1862, 1, 249 ff.]. Schemer 
(1861) and after him Volkelt (1875) endeavoured subsequently to inves- 
tigate in more detail the relation between somatic stimuli and dream- 
images, but I shall postpone my consideration of these attempts till we 
reach the section dealing with the various theories about dreams. [See be- 
low, pp. 109 ff.] 

Krauss [1859, 255], the psychiatrist, in an investigation carried 
through with remarkable consistency, traces the origin alike of dreams 
and of deliria 1 and delusions to the same factor, namely to organically de- 
termined sensations. It is scarcely possible to think of any part of the or- 
ganism which might not be the starting point of a dream or of a delusion. 
Organically determined sensations ‘may be divided into two classes: (1) 
those constituting the general mood (coenaesthesia) and (2) the specific 
sensations immanent in the principal systems of the vegetative organism. 
Of these latter five groups are to be distinguished: (a) muscular, (b) respir- 
atory, (c) gastric, (d) sexual and (e) peripheral sensations.’ Krauss sup- 
poses that the process by which dream-images arise on the basis of 
somatic stimuli is as follows. The sensation that has been aroused evokes 
a cognate image, in accordance with some law of association. It combines 
with the image into an organic structure, to which, however, conscious- 
ness reacts abnormally. For it pays no attention to the sensation , but di- 
rects the whole of it to the accompanying images — which explains why 
the true facts were for so long misunderstood. Krauss has a special term 
for describing this process: the ‘trans-substantiation’ of sensations into 
dream-images. 

The influence of organic somatic stimuli upon the formation of 
dreams is almost universally accepted today; but the question of the laws 
that govern the relation between them is answered in very various ways, 
and often by obscure pronouncements. On the basis of the theory of so- 
matic stimulation, dream-interpretation is thus faced with the special 
problem of tracing back the content of a dream to the organic stimuli 
which caused it; and, if the rules for interpretation laid down by Schemer 
(1861) are not accepted, one is often faced with the awkward fact that the 


'[Perhaps ‘hallucinations’; see p. 87 n.] 




C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 


69 


only thing that reveals the existence of the organic stimulus is precisely 
the content of the dream itself. 

There is a fair amount of agreement, however, over the interpretation 
of various forms of dreams that are described as ‘typical,’ because they oc- 
cur in large numbers of people and with very similar content. Such are the 
familiar dreams of falling from a height, of teeth falling out, of flying and 
of embarrassment at being naked or insufficiently clad. This last dream is 
attributed simply to the sleeper’s perceiving that he has thrown off his bed- 
clothes in his sleep and is lying exposed to the air. The dream of teeth 
falling out is traced back to a ‘dental stimulus,’ though this does not nec- 
essarily imply that the excitation of the teeth is a pathological one. Accord- 
ing to Striimpel [1877, 119] the flying dream is the image which is found 
appropriate by the mind as an interpretation of the stimulus produced by 
the rising and sinking of the lobes of the lungs at times when cutaneous 
sensations in the thorax have ceased to be conscious: it is this latter circum- 
stance that leads to the feeling which is attached to the idea of floating. 
The dream of falling from a height is said to be due to an arm falling away 
from the body or a flexed knee being suddenly extended at a time when 
the sense of cutaneous pressure is beginning to be no longer conscious; the 
movements in question cause the tactile sensations to become conscious 
once more, and the transition to consciousness is represented psychically 
by the dream of falling (ibid., 118). The obvious weakness of these at- 
tempted explanations, plausible though they are, lies in the fact that, with- 
out any other evidence, they can make successive hypotheses that this or 
that group of organic sensations enters or disappears from mental percep- 
tion, till a constellation has been reached which affords an explanation of 
the dream. I shall later have occasion to return to the question of typical 
dreams and their origin. [Cf. pp. 259 ff. and 395 ff.] 

Simon (1888, 34 f.) has attempted to deduce some of the rules gov- 
erning the way in which organic stimuli determine the resultant dreams 
by comparing a series of similar dreams. He asserts that if an organic ap- 
paratus which normally plays a part in the expression of an emotion is 
brought by some extraneous cause during sleep into the state of excitation 
which is usually produced by the emotion, then a dream will arise which 
will contain images appropriate to the emotion in question. Another rule 
lays it down that if during sleep an organ is in a state of activity, excitation 
or disturbance, the dream will produce images related to the performance 
of the function which is discharged by the organ concerned. 



70 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


Mourly Void (1896) has set out to prove experimentally in one partic- 
ular field the effect on the production of dreams which is asserted by the 
theory of somatic stimulation. His experiments consisted in altering 
the position of a sleeper’s limbs and comparing the resultant dreams with 
the alterations made. He states his findings as follows: 

(1) The position of a limb in the dream corresponds approximately to 
its position in reality. Thus, we dream of the limb being in a static condi- 
tion when it is so actually. 

(2) If we dream of a limb moving, then one of the positions passed 
through in the course of completing the movement invariably corre- 
sponds to the limb’s actual position. 

(3) The position of the dreamer’s own limb may be ascribed in the 
dream to some other person. 

(4) The dream may be of the movement in question being hindered. 

(5) The limb which is in the position in question may appear in the 
dream as an animal or monster, in which case a certain analogy is estab- 
lished between them. 

(6) The position of a limb may give rise in the dream to thoughts 
which have some connection with the limb. Thus, if the fingers are con- 
cerned, we dream of numbers. 

I should be inclined to conclude from findings such as these that even 
the theory of somatic stimulation has not succeeded in completely doing 
away with the apparent absence of determination in the choice of what 
dream-images are to be produced. 1 


4. Psychical Sources of Stimulation 

When we were dealing with the relations of dreams to waking life and 
with the material of dreams, we found that the most ancient and the most 
recent students of dreams were united in believing that men dream of what 
they do during the daytime and of what interests them while they are 
awake [pp. 41 £]. Such an interest, carried over from waking life into sleep, 
would not only be a mental bond, a link between dreams and life, but 
would also provide us with a further source of dreams and one not to be 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] This author has since produced a two-volume report on 
his experiments (1910 and 1912), which is referred to below. [See p. 243 n. 2.] 




C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 


71 


despised. Indeed, taken in conjunction with the interests that develop dur- 
ing sleep — the stimuli that impinge on the sleeper — it might be enough to 
explain the origin of all dream-images. But we have also heard the opposite 
asserted, namely that dreams withdraw the sleeper from the interests of 
daytime and that, as a rule, we only start dreaming of the things that have 
most struck us during the day, after they have lost the spice of actuality in 
waking life. [Pp. 41 and 51.] Thus at every step we take in our analysis of 
dream-life we come to feel that it is impossible to make generalizations 
without covering ourselves by such qualifying phrases as ‘frequently,’ ‘as a 
rule’ or ‘in most cases,’ and without being prepared to admit the validity 
of exceptions. 

If it were a fact that waking interests, along with internal and external 
stimuli during sleep, sufficed to exhaust the aetiology of dreams, we 
ought to be in a position to give a satisfactory account of the origin of 
every element of a dream: the riddle of the sources of dreams would be 
solved, and it would only remain to define the share taken respectively by 
psychical and somatic stimuli in any particular dream. Actually no such 
complete explanation of a dream has ever yet been achieved, and anyone 
who has attempted it has found portions (and usually very numerous por- 
tions) of the dream regarding whose origin he could find nothing to say. 
Daytime interests are clearly not such far-reaching psychical sources of 
dreams as might have been expected from the categorical assertions that 
everyone continues to carry on his daily business in his dreams. 

No other psychical sources of dreams are known. So it comes about 
that all the explanations of dreams given in the literature of the subject — 
with the possible exception of Schemer’s, which will be dealt with later 
[see p. 109] — leave a great gap when it comes to assigning an origin for 
the ideational images which constitute the most characteristic material of 
dreams. In this embarrassing situation, a majority of the writers on the 
subject have tended to reduce to a minimum the part played by psychical 
factors in instigating dreams, since those factors are so hard to come at. It 
is true that they divide dreams into two main classes — those ‘due to ner- 
vous stimulation’ and those ‘due to association,’ of which the latter have 
their source exclusively in reproduction [of material already experienced] 
(cf. Wundt, 1874, 657 f.). Nevertheless they cannot escape a doubt 
‘whether any dream can take place without being given an impetus by 
some somatic stimulus’ (Volkelt, 1875, 127). It is difficult even to give a 
description of purely associative dreams. ‘In associative dreams proper, 
there can be no question of any such solid core [derived from somatic 



72 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 

stimulation] . Even the very centre of the dream is only loosely put to- 
gether. The ideational processes, which in any dream are ungoverned by 
reason or common sense, are here no longer even held together by any 
relatively important somatic or mental excitations, and are thus aban- 
doned to their own kaleidoscopic changes and to their own jumbled con- 
fusion.’ (Ibid., 118.) Wundt (1874, 656-7), too, seeks to minimize the 
psychical factor in the instigation of dreams. He declares that there seems 
to be no justification for regarding the phantasms of dreams as pure hal- 
lucinations; most dream-images are probably in fact illusions, since they 
arise from faint sense-impressions, which never cease during sleep. Wey- 
gandt (1893, 17) has adopted this same view and made its application 
general. He asserts of all dream-images ‘that their primary causes are sen- 
sory stimuli and that only later do reproductive associations become at- 
tached to them.’ Tissie (1898, 183) goes even further in putting a limit 
to the psychical sources of stimulation: ‘Les reves d’origine absolument 
psychique n’existent pas’; and (ibid., 6) ‘les pensees de nos reves nous vi- 
ennent du dehors. . . . n 

Those writers who, like that eminent philosopher Wundt, take up a 
middle position do not fail to remark that in most dreams somatic stimuli 
and the psychical instigators (whether unknown or recognized as daytime 
interests) work in cooperation. 

We shall find later that the enigma of the formation of dreams can be 
solved by the revelation of an unsuspected psychical source of stimula- 
tion. Meanwhile we shall feel no surprise at the over-estimation of the 
part played in forming dreams by stimuli which do not arise from mental 
life. Not only are they easy to discover and even open to experimental 
confirmation; but the somatic view of the origin of dreams is completely 
in line with the prevailing trend of thought in psychiatry today. It is true 
that the dominance of the brain over the organism is asserted with appar- 
ent confidence. Nevertheless, anything that might indicate that mental 
life is in any way independent of demonstrable organic changes or that its 
manifestations are in any way spontaneous alarms the modern psychia- 
trist, as though a recognition of such things would inevitably bring back 
the days of the Philosophy of Nature [see p. 39 n.], and of the metaphys- 
ical view of the nature of mind. The suspicions of the psychiatrists have 


1 [‘Dreams of purely psychical origin do not exist.’ ‘The thoughts in our dreams 
reach us from outside.’] 




D. Why Dreams Are Forgotten 


73 


put the mind, as it were, under tutelage, and they now insist that none of 
its impulses shall be allowed to suggest that it has any means of its own. 
This behaviour of theirs only shows how little trust they really have in the 
validity of a causal connection between the somatic and the mental. Even 
when investigation shows that the primary exciting cause of a phenome- 
non is psychical, deeper research will one day trace the path further and 
discover an organic basis for the mental event. But if at the moment we 
cannot see beyond the mental, that is no reason for denying its existence. 1 


(D) 

WHY DREAMS ARE FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING 

It is a proverbial fact that dreams melt away in the morning. They can, 
of course, be remembered; for we only know dreams from our memory 
of them after we are awake. But we very often have a feeling that we have 
only remembered a dream in part and that there was more of it during 
the night; we can observe, too, how the recollection of a dream, which 
was still lively in the morning, will melt away, except for a few small frag- 
ments, in the course of the day; we often know we have dreamt, without 
knowing what we have dreamt; and we are so familiar with the fact of 
dreams being liable to be forgotten, that we see no absurdity in the possi- 
bility of someone having had a dream in the night and of his not being 
aware in the morning either of what he has dreamt or even of the fact that 
he has dreamt at all. On the other hand, it sometimes happens that 
dreams show an extraordinary persistence in the memory. I have analysed 
dreams in my patients which occurred twenty-five and more years earlier; 
and I can remember a dream of my own separated by at least thirty-seven 
years from today and yet as fresh as ever in my memory. All of this is very 
remarkable and not immediately intelligible. 

The most detailed account of the forgetting of dreams is the one given 
by Striimpell [1877, 79 £]. It is evidently a complex phenomenon, for 
Striimpell traces it back not to a single cause but to a whole number of them. 


1 [The topics in this section are taken up again in Section C of Chapter V 
(pp. 240 ff.)J 




74 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


In the first place, all the causes that lead to forgetting in waking life are 
operative for dreams as well. When we are awake we regularly forget 
countless sensations and perceptions at once, because they were too weak 
or because the mental excitation attaching to them was too slight. The 
same holds good of many dream-images: they are forgotten because they 
are too weak, while stronger images adjacent to them are remembered. 
The factor of intensity, however, is certainly not in itself enough to deter- 
mine whether a dream-image shall be recollected. Striimpell [1877, 82] 
admits, as well as other writers (e.g. Calkins, 1893, 312), that we often for- 
get dream-images which we know were very vivid, while a very large num- 
ber which are shadowy and lacking in sensory force are among those 
retained in the memory. Moreover when we are awake we tend easily to 
forget an event which occurs only once and more readily to notice what 
can be perceived repeatedly. Now most dream-images are unique experi- 
ences; 1 and that fact will contribute impartially towards making us forget 
all dreams. Far more importance attaches to a third cause of forgetting. If 
sensations, ideas, thoughts, and so on, are to attain a certain degree of sus- 
ceptibility to being remembered, it is essential that they should not remain 
isolated but should be arranged in appropriate concatenations and group- 
ings. If a short line of verse is divided up into its component words and 
these are mixed up, it becomes very hard to remember. ‘If words are prop- 
erly arranged and put into the relevant order, one word will help another, 
and the whole, being charged with meaning, will be easily taken up by the 
memory and retained for a long time. It is in general as difficult and un- 
usual to retain what is nonsensical as it is to retain what is confused and 
disordered.’ [Striimpell, 1877, 83.] Now dreams are in most cases lacking 
in intelligibility and orderliness. The compositions which constitute 
dreams are barren of the qualities which would make it possible to remem- 
ber them, and they are forgotten because as a rule they fall to pieces a mo- 
ment later. Radestock (1879, 168), however, claims to have observed that 
it is the most peculiar dreams that are best remembered, and this, it must 
be admitted, would scarcely tally with what has just been said. 

Striimpell [1877, 82 £] believes that certain other factors derived from 
the relation between dreaming and waking life are of still greater impor- 
tance in causing dreams to be forgotten. The liability of dreams to be for- 
gotten by waking consciousness is evidently only the counterpart of the 


1 Dreams that recur periodically have often been observed. Cf. the collection given 
by Chabaneix (1897). [Cf. pp. 212 £] 




D. Why Dreams Are Forgotten 


75 


fact which has been mentioned earlier [p. 53] that dreams scarcely ever 
take over ordered recollections from waking life, but only details selected 
from them, which they tear from the psychical context in which they are 
usually remembered in the waking state. Thus dream-compositions find 
no place in the company of the psychical sequences with which the mind 
is filled. There is nothing that can help us to remember them. ‘In this way 
dream-structures are, as it were, lifted above the floor of our mental life 
and float in psychical space like clouds in the sky, scattered by the first 
breath of wind.’ (Striimpell, 1 877, 87.) After waking, moreover, the world 
of the senses presses forward and at once takes possession of the attention 
with a force which very few dream-images can resist; so that here too we 
have another factor tending in the same direction. Dreams give way before 
the impressions of a new day just as the brilliance of the stars yields to the 
light of the sun. 

Finally, there is another fact to be borne in mind as likely to lead to 
dreams being forgotten, namely that most people take very little interest 
in their dreams. Anyone, such as a scientific investigator, who pays atten- 
tion to his dreams over a period of time will have more dreams than 
usual — which no doubt means that he remembers his dreams with greater 
ease and frequency. 

Two further reasons why dreams should be forgotten, which Benini 
[1898, 155-6] quotes as having been brought forward by Bonatelli [1880] 
as additions to those mentioned by Striimpell, seem in fact to be already 
covered by the latter. They are (1) that the alteration in coenaesthesia be- 
tween the sleeping and waking states is unfavourable to reciprocal repro- 
duction between them; and (2) that the different arrangement of the 
ideational material in dreams makes them untranslatable, as it were, for 
waking consciousness. 

In view of all these reasons in favour of dreams being forgotten, it is in 
fact (as Striimpell himself insists [1877, 6]) very remarkable that so many 
of them are retained in the memory. The repeated attempts by writers on 
the subject to lay down the rules governing the recollection of dreams 
amount to an admission that here too we are faced by something puzzling 
and unexplained. Certain particular characteristics of the recollection of 
dreams have been rightly emphasized recently (cf. Radestock, 1879, [169], 
and Tissie, 1898, [148 f.]), such as the fact that when a dream seems in 
the morning to have been forgotten, it may nevertheless be recollected 
during the course of the day, if its content, forgotten though it is, is 
touched upon by some chance perception. 



76 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


But the recollection of dreams in general is open to an objection which 
is bound to reduce their value very completely in critical opinion. Since 
so great a proportion of dreams is lost altogether, we may well doubt 
whether our memory of what is left of them may not be falsified. 

These doubts as to the accuracy of the reproduction of dreams are also 
expressed by Striimpell (1877, [119]): ‘Thus it may easily happen that 
waking consciousness unwittingly makes interpolations in the memory of 
a dream: we persuade ourselves that we have dreamt all kinds of things 
that were not contained in the actual dreams.’ 

Jessen (1855, 547) writes with special emphasis on this point: ‘More- 
over, in investigating and interpreting coherent and consistent dreams a 
particular circumstance must be borne in mind which, as it seems to me, 
has hitherto received too little attention. In such cases the truth is almost 
always obscured by the fact that when we recall dreams of this kind to our 
memory we almost always — unintentionally and without noticing the 
fact — fill in the gaps in the dream-images. It is seldom or never that a co- 
herent dream was in fact as coherent as it seems to us in memory. Even 
the most truth-loving of men is scarcely able to relate a noteworthy dream 
without some additions or embellishments. The tendency of the human 
mind to see everything connectedly is so strong that in memory it unwit- 
tingly fills in any lack of coherence there may be in an incoherent dream.’ 

Some remarks made by Egger [1895, 41], though they were no doubt 
arrived at independently, read almost like a translation of this passage 
from Jessen: . . . L’observation des reves a ses difficultes speciales et le 
seul moyen d’eviter tout erreur en pareille matiere est de confier au papier 
sans le moindre retard ce que Ton vient d’eprouver et de remarquer; 
sinon, l’oubli vient vite ou total ou partiel; l’oubli total est sans gravite; 
mais l’oubli partiel est perfide; car si Ton se met ensuite a raconter ce que 
1’on n’a pas oublie, on est expose a completer par imagination les frag- 
ments incoherents et disjoints fournis par la memoire . . . ; on devient 
artiste a son insu, et le recit periodiquement repete s’impose a la creance 
de son auteur, qui, de bonne foi, le presente comme un fait authentique, 
dument etabli selon les bonnes methodes. . . . n 


1 [‘There are peculiar difficulties in observing dreams, and the only way of escap- 
ing all errors in such matters is to put down upon paper with the least possible 
delay what we have just experienced or observed. Otherwise forgetfulness, 
whether total or partial, quickly supervenes. Total forgetfulness is not serious; 
but partial forgetfulness is treacherous. For if we then proceed to give an account 




E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams 77 


Very similar ideas are expressed by Spitta (1882, 338), who seems to be- 
lieve that it is not until we try to reproduce a dream that we introduce or- 
der of any kind into its loosely associated elements: we ‘change things that 
are merely juxtaposed into sequences or causal chains, that is to say, we in- 
troduce a process of logical connection which is lacking in the dream.’ 

Since the only check that we have upon the validity of our memory is 
objective confirmation, and since that is unobtainable for dreams, which 
are our own personal experience and of which the only source we have is 
our recollection, what value can we still attach to our memory of dreams? 1 


(E) 

THE DISTINGUISHING PSYCHOLOGICAL 
CHARACTERISTICS OL DREAMS 

Our scientific consideration of dreams starts off from the assumption that 
they are products of our own mental activity. Nevertheless the finished 
dream strikes us as something alien to us. We are so little obliged to ac- 
knowledge our responsibility for it that [in German] we are just as ready 
to say ‘ mir hat getrdumi [‘I had a dream,’ literally ‘a dream came to me’] 
as ‘ ich babe getrdumi [‘I dreamt’]. What is the origin of this feeling that 
dreams are extraneous to our minds? In view of our discussion upon the 
sources of dreams, we must conclude that the strangeness cannot be due 
to the material that finds its way into their content, since that material is 
for the most part common to dreaming and waking life. The question 
arises whether in dreams there may not be modifications in the processes 
of the mind which produce the impression we are discussing; and we shall 
therefore make an attempt at drawing a picture of the psychological at- 
tributes of dreams. 


of what we have not forgotten, we are liable to fill in from our imagination the 
incoherent and disjointed fragments furnished by memory. . . . We unwittingly 
become creative artists; and the tale, if it is repeated from time to time, imposes 
itself on its author’s own belief, and he ends by offering it in good faith as an au- 
thentic fact duly and legitimately established.’] 

1 [The questions raised in this section are taken up in Chapter VII, Section A 
(pp. 516 ff.).] 




78 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


No one has emphasized more sharply the essential difference between 
dreaming and waking life or drawn more far-reaching conclusions from 
it than G. T. Fechner in a passage in his Elemente der Psychophysik (1889, 
2, 520—1). In his opinion, ‘neither the mere lowering of conscious mental 
life below the main threshold,’ nor the withdrawal of attention from the 
influences of the external world, are enough to explain the characteristics 
of dream-life as contrasted with waking life. He suspects, rather, that the 
scene of action of dreams is different from that of waking ideational life. ‘If 
the scene of action of psychophysical activity were the same in sleeping 
and waking, dreams could, in my view, only be a prolongation at a lower 
degree of intensity of waking ideational life and, moreover, would neces- 
sarily be of the same material and form. But the facts are quite otherwise.’ 

It is not clear what Fechner had in mind in speaking of this change of 
location of mental activity; nor, so far as I know, has anyone else pursued 
the path indicated by his words. We may, I think, dismiss the possibility 
of giving the phrase an anatomical interpretation and supposing it to refer 
to physiological cerebral localization or even to the histological layers of 
the cerebral cortex. It may be, however, that the suggestion will eventually 
prove to be sagacious and fertile, if it can be applied to a mental apparatus 
built up of a number of agencies arranged in a series one behind the 
other. 1 

Other writers have contented themselves with drawing attention to 
the more tangible of the distinguishing characteristics of dream-life and 
with taking them as a starting-point for attempts at more far-reaching 
explanations. 

It has justly been remarked that one of the principal peculiarities of 
dream-life makes its appearance during the very process of falling asleep 
and may be described as a phenomenon heralding sleep. According to 
Schleiermacher (1862, 351), what characterizes the waking state is the 
fact that thought-activity takes place in concepts and not in images. Now 
dreams think essentially in images; and with the approach of sleep it is 
possible to observe how, in proportion as voluntary activities become 
more difficult, involuntary ideas arise, all of which fall into the class of 
images. Incapacity for ideational work of the kind which we feel as inten- 
tionally willed and the emergence (habitually associated with such states 


1 [This idea is taken up and developed in Chapter VII, Section B, of the present 
work (pp. 535 ff.).] 




E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams 79 


of abstraction) of images — these are two characteristics which persevere 
in dreams and which the psychological analysis of dreams forces us to rec- 
ognize as essential features of dream-life. We have already seen [pp. 63 f£] 
that these images — hypnagogic hallucinations — are themselves identical 
in their content with dream-images. 1 

Dreams, then, think predominantly in visual images — but not exclu- 
sively. They make use of auditory images as well, and, to a lesser extent, 
of impressions belonging to the other senses. Many things, too, occur in 
dreams (just as they normally do in waking life) simply as thoughts or 
ideas — probably, that is to say, in the form of residues of verbal presenta- 
tions. Nevertheless, what are truly characteristic of dreams are only those 
elements of their content which behave like images, which are more like 
perceptions, that is, than they are like mnemic presentations. Leaving on 
one side all the arguments, so familiar to psychiatrists, on the nature of 
hallucinations, we shall be in agreement with every authority on the sub- 
ject in asserting that dreams hallucinate — that they replace thoughts by 
hallucinations. In this respect there is no distinction between visual and 
acoustic presentations: it has been observed that if one falls asleep with 
the memory of a series of musical notes in one’s mind, the memory be- 
comes transformed into an hallucination of the same melody; while, if 
one then wakes up again — and the two states may alternate more than 
once during the process of dropping asleep — the hallucination gives way 
in turn to the mnemic presentation, which is at once fainter and qualita- 
tively different from it. 

The transformation of ideas into hallucinations is not the only respect 
in which dreams differ from corresponding thoughts in waking life. 
Dreams construct a situation out of these images; they represent an event 
which is actually happening; as Spitta (1882, 145) puts it, they ‘drama- 
tize’ an idea. But this feature of dream-life can only be fully understood 
if we further recognize that in dreams — as a rule, for there are exceptions 
which require special examination — we appear not to think but to experi- 
ence ; that is to say, we attach complete belief to the hallucinations. Not 


1 [ Footnote added 1911:] Silberer (1909) has given some nice examples of the way 
in which, in a drowsy state, even abstract thoughts become converted into picto- 
rial plastic images which seek to express the same meaning. [Added 1925:] I shall 
have occasion to return to this discovery in another connection. [See pp. 358 ff. 
and 507 ff.] 




80 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


until we wake up does the critical comment arise that we have not expe- 
rienced anything but have merely been thinking in a peculiar way, or in 
other words dreaming. It is this characteristic that distinguishes true 
dreams from daydreaming, which is never confused with reality. 

Burdach (1838, 502 f.) summarizes the features of dream-life which 
we have so far discussed in the following words: ‘These are among the es- 
sential features of dreams: (a) In dreams the subjective activity of our 
minds appears in an objective form, for our perceptive faculties regard the 
products of our imagination as though they were sense impressions. . . . 
(b) Sleep signifies an end of the authority of the self. Hence falling asleep 
brings a certain degree of passivity along with it. . . . The images that ac- 
company sleep can occur only on condition that the authority of the self 
is reduced.’ 

The next thing is to try to explain the belief which the mind accords 
to dream-hallucinations, a belief which can only arise after some kind of 
‘authoritative’ activity of the self has ceased. Striimpell (1877) argues that 
in this respect the mind is carrying out its function correctly and in con- 
formity with its own mechanism. Far from being mere presentations, the 
elements of dreams are true and real mental experiences of the same kind 
as arise in a waking state through the agency of the senses. (Ibid., 34.) 
The waking mind produces ideas and thoughts in verbal images and in 
speech; but in dreams it does so in true sensory images. (Ibid., 35.) More- 
over, there is a spatial consciousness in dreams, since sensations and im- 
ages are assigned to an external space, just as they are in waking. (Ibid., 
36.) It must therefore be allowed that in dreams the mind is in the same 
relation to its images and perceptions as it is in waking. (Ibid., 43.) If it is 
nevertheless in error in so doing, that is because in the state of sleep it 
lacks the criterion which alone makes it possible to distinguish between 
sense-perceptions arising from without and from within. It is unable to 
submit its dream-images to the only tests which could prove their objec- 
tive reality. In addition to this, it disregards the distinction between im- 
ages which are only interchangeable arbitrarily and cases where the 
element of arbitrariness is absent. It is in error because it is unable to ap- 
ply the law of causality to the content of its dreams. (Ibid., 50-1.) In 
short, the fact of its having turned away from the external world is also 
the reason for its belief in the subjective world of dreams. 

Delboeuf (1885, 84) arrives at the same conclusion after somewhat 
different psychological arguments. We believe in the reality of dream- 
images, he says, because in our sleep we have no other impressions with 



E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams 81 


which to compare them, because we are detached from the external 
world. But the reason why we believe in the truth of these hallucinations 
is not because it is impossible to put them to the test within the dream. A 
dream can seem to offer us such tests: it can let us touch the rose that we 
see — and yet we are dreaming. In Delboeuf’s opinion there is only one 
valid criterion of whether we are dreaming or awake, and that is the 
purely empirical one of the fact of waking up. I conclude that everything 
I experienced between falling asleep and waking up was illusory, when, 
on awaking, I find that I am lying undressed in bed. During sleep I took 
the dream-images as real owing to my mental habit (which cannot be put 
to sleep) of assuming the existence of an external world with which I con- 
trast my own ego. 1 


1 Haffner (1887, 243) attempts, like Delboeuf, to explain the activity of dreaming 
by the modification which the introduction of an abnormal condition must in- 
evitably produce in the otherwise correct functioning of an intact mental appa- 
ratus; but he gives a somewhat different account of that condition. According to 
him the first mark of a dream is its independence of space and time, i.e. the fact 
of a presentation being emancipated from the position occupied by the subject 
in the spatial and temporal order of events. The second basic feature of dreams 
is connected with this — namely, the fact that hallucinations, phantasies and 
imaginary combinations are confused with external perceptions. ‘All the higher 
powers of the mind — in particular the formation of concepts and the powers of 
judgement and inference on the one hand and free self-determination on the 
other hand — are attached to sensory images and have at all times a background 
of such images. It follows, therefore, that these higher activities too take their 
part in the disorderliness of the dream-images. I say “take their part,” since in 
themselves our powers of judgement and of will are in no way altered in sleep. 
Our activities are just as clear-sighted and just as free as in waking life. Even in 
his dreams a man cannot violate the laws of thought as such — he cannot, for in- 
stance, regard as identical things that appear to him as contraries, and so on. So 
too in dreams he can only desire what he looks upon as a good (sitb ratione boni). 
But the human spirit is led astray in dreams in its application of the laws of 
thought and of will through confusing one idea with another. Thus it comes 
about that we are guilty of the grossest contradictions in dreams, while at the 
same time we can make the clearest judgements, draw the most logical inferences 
and come to the most virtuous and saintly decisions. . . . Lack of orientation is 
the whole secret of the flights taken by our imagination in dreams, and lack of 
critical reflection and of communication with other people is the main source of 
the unbridled extravagance exhibited in dreams by our judgements as well as by 
our hopes and wishes.’ (Ibid., 18.) [The problem of ‘reality- testing’ is considered 
later, on p. 566.] 




82 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


Detachment from the external world seems thus to be regarded as the 
factor determining the most marked features of dream-life. It is therefore 
worth while quoting some penetrating remarks made long ago by Bur- 
dach which throw light on the relations between the sleeping mind and 
the external world and which are calculated to prevent our setting too 
great store by the conclusions drawn in the last few pages. ‘Sleep,’ he 
writes, ‘can occur only on condition that the mind is not irritated by sen- 
sory stimuli. . . . But the actual precondition of sleep is not so much ab- 
sence of sensory stimuli as absence of interest in them. 1 Some sense 
impressions may actually be necessary in order to calm the mind. Thus 
the miller can only sleep so long as he hears the clacking of his mill; and 
anyone who feels that burning a night-light is a necessary precaution, 
finds it impossible to get to sleep in the dark.’ (Burdach, 1838, 482.) 

‘In sleep the mind isolates itself from the external world and with- 
draws from its own periphery. . . . Nevertheless connection is not broken 
off entirely. If we could not hear or feel while we were actually asleep, but 
only after we had woken up, it would be impossible to wake us at all. . . . 
The persistence of sensation is proved even more clearly by the fact that 
what rouses us is not always the mere sensory strength of an impression 
but its psychical context: a sleeping man is not aroused by an indifferent 
word, but if he is called by name he wakes. . . . Thus the mind in sleep 
distinguishes between sensations. ... It is for that reason that the absence 
of a sensory stimulus can wake a man if it is related to something of 
ideational importance to him; so it is that the man with the night-light 
wakes if it is extinguished and the miller is roused if his mill comes to a 
stop. He is awakened, that is, by the cessation of a sensory activity; and 
this implies that that activity was perceived by him, but, since it was in- 
different, or rather satisfying, did not disturb his mind.’ (Ibid., 485-6.) 

Even if we disregard these objections — and they are by no means tri- 
fling ones — we shall have to confess that the features of dream-life which 
we have considered hitherto, and which have been ascribed to its detach- 
ment from the external world, do not account completely for its strange 
character. For it should be possible otherwise to turn the hallucinations 
in a dream back into ideas, and its situations into thoughts, and in that 
way to solve the problem of dream-interpretation. And that in fact is 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] Cf. the ‘desinteret’ which Claparede (1905, 306 f.) re- 
gards as the mechanism of falling asleep. 




E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams 83 


what we are doing when, after waking, we reproduce a dream from mem- 
ory; but, whether we succeed in making this re-translation wholly or only 
in part, the dream remains no less enigmatic than before. 

And indeed all the authorities unhesitatingly assume that yet other and 
more deep-going modifications of the ideational material of waking life 
take place in dreams. Striimpell (1877, 27-8) has endeavoured to put his 
finger on one such modification in the following passage: ‘With the cessa- 
tion of sensory functioning and of normal vital consciousness, the mind 
loses the soil in which its feelings, desires, interests and activities are rooted. 
The psychical states, too — feelings, interests, judgements of value — which 
are linked to mnemic images in waking life, are subjected to ... an obscur- 
ing pressure, as a result of which their connection with those images is bro- 
ken; perceptual images of things, persons, places, events and actions in 
waking life are reproduced separately in great numbers, but none of them 
carries its psychical value along with it. That value is detached from them 
and they thus float about in the mind at their own sweet will. . . . ’ Accord- 
ing to Striimpell, the fact of images being denuded of their psychical value 
(which in turn goes back to detachment from the external world) plays a 
principal part in creating the impression of strangeness which distinguishes 
dreams from actual life in our memory. 

We have seen [cf. p. 79] that falling asleep at once involves the loss of 
one of our mental activities, namely our power of giving intentional guid- 
ance to the sequence of our ideas. We are now faced by the suggestion, 
which is in any case a plausible one, that the effects of the state of sleep 
may extend over all the faculties of the mind. Some of these seem to be 
entirely suspended; but the question now arises whether the rest continue 
to operate normally and whether under such conditions they are capable 
of normal work. And here it may be asked whether the distinguishing 
features of dreams cannot be explained by the lowering of psychical 
efficiency in the sleeping state — a notion which finds support in the im- 
pression made by dreams on our waking judgement. Dreams are discon- 
nected, they accept the most violent contradictions without the least 
objection, they admit impossibilities, they disregard knowledge which 
carries great weight with us in the day-time, they reveal us as ethical and 
moral imbeciles. Anyone who when he was awake behaved in the sort of 
way that is shown in situations in dreams would be considered insane. 
Anyone who when he was awake talked in the sort of way that people talk 
in dreams or described the sort of thing that happens in dreams would 
give us the impression of being muddle-headed or feeble-minded. It 



84 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


seems to be no more than putting the truth into words when we express 
our very low opinion of mental activity in dreams and assert that in 
dreams the higher intellectual faculties in particular are suspended or at 
all events gravely impaired. 

The authorities display unusual unanimity — exceptions will be treated 
later [pp. 88 f£] — in expressing opinions of this kind on dreams; and 
these judgements lead directly to a particular theory or explanation of 
dream-life. But it is time for me to leave generalities and to give instead a 
series of quotations from various writers — philosophers and physicians — 
upon the psychological characteristics of dreams. 

According to Lemoine (1855), the ‘incoherence’ of dream-images is 
the one essential characteristic of dreams. 

Maury (1878, 163) agrees with him: ‘II n’y a pas de reves absolument 
raisonnables et qui ne contiennent quelque incoherence, quelque 
anachronisme, quelque absurdite.’ 1 

Spitta [1882, 193] quotes Hegel as saying that dreams are devoid of 
all objectives and reasonable coherence. 

Dugas [1897<z, 417] writes: ‘Le reve c’est fanarchie psychique affective 
et mentale, c’est le jeu des fonctions livrees a ellesmemes et s’exer^ant sans 
controle et sans but; dans le reve l’esprit est un automate spirituel.’ 2 

Even Volkelt (1875, 14), whose theory is far from regarding psychical 
activity during sleep as purposeless, speaks of ‘the relaxing, disconnecting 
and confusing of ideational life, which in the waking state is held together 
by the logical force of the central ego.’ 

The absurdity of the associations of ideas that occur in dreams could 
scarcely be criticized more sharply than it was by Cicero {De divinatione, 
II, [lxxi, 146]): ‘Nihil tarn praepostere, tarn incondite, tam monstruose 
cogitari potest, quod non possimus somniare.’ 3 

Fechner (1889, 2, 522) writes: ‘It is as though psychological activity had 
been transported from the brain of a reasonable man into that of a fool.’ 


1 [‘There are no dreams that are absolutely reasonable and that do not contain 
some incoherence, anachronism or absurdity.’] 

1 [‘A dream is psychical, emotional and mental anarchy; it is the play of functions 
left to their own devices and acting without control or purpose; in dreams the 
spirit becomes a spiritual automaton.’] 

3 [‘There is no imaginable thing too absurd, too involved, or too abnormal for us 
to dream about it.’ (Falconer’s translation in the Loeb Classical Library, 1922, 
533.)] 



E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams 85 


Radestock (1879, 145): ‘In fact it seems impossible to detect any fixed 
laws in this crazy activity. After withdrawing from the strict policing ex- 
ercised over the course of waking ideas by the rational will and the atten- 
tion, dreams melt into a mad whirl of kaleidoscopic confusion.’ 

Hildebrandt (1875, 45): ‘What astonishing leaps a dreamer may 
make, for instance, in drawing inferences! How calmly he is prepared to 
see the most familiar lessons of experience turned upside down. What 
laughable contradictions he is ready to accept in the laws of nature and 
society before, as we say, things get beyond a joke and the excessive strain 
of nonsense wakes him up. We calculate without a qualm that three times 
three make twenty; we are not in the least surprised when a dog quotes a 
line of poetry, or when a dead man walks to his grave on his own legs, or 
when we see a rock floating on the water; we proceed gravely on an im- 
portant mission to the Duchy of Bernburg or to the Principality of 
Liechtenstein to inspect their naval forces; or we are persuaded to enlist 
under Charles XII shortly before the battle of Poltava.’ 

Binz (1878, 33), having in mind the theory of dreams which is based 
upon such impressions as these, writes: ‘The content of at least nine out of 
ten dreams is nonsensical. We bring together in them people and things 
that have no connection whatever with one another. Next moment there 
is a shift in the kaleidoscope and we are faced by a new grouping, more 
senseless and crazy, if possible, than the last. And so the changing play of 
the incompletely sleeping brain goes on, till we awake and clasp our fore- 
head and wonder whether we still possess the capacity for rational ideas 
and thoughts.’ 

Maury (1878, 50) finds a parallel to the relation between dream- 
images and waking thoughts which will be highly significant to physi- 
cians: ‘La production de ces images que chez I’homme eveille fait le plus 
souvent naitre la volonte, correspond, pour l’intelligence, a ce que sont 
pour la motilite certains mouvements que nous offre la choree et les af- 
fections paralytiques . . . ’' He further regards dreams as ‘toute une serie 
de degradations de la faculte pensante et raisonnante.’ (Ibid., 27.) 1 2 


1 [‘The production of these images (which in a waking person are usually pro- 
voked by the will) corresponds in the sphere of intelligence to the place taken in 
the sphere of motion by some of the movements observable in chorea and para- 
lytic disorders.’] 

2 [‘A whole series of degradations of the thinking and reasoning faculty.’] 




86 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


It is scarcely necessary to quote the writers who repeat Maury’s opinion 
in relation to the various higher mental functions. Striimpell (1877, 26), 
for instance, remarks that in dreams — even, of course, where there is no 
manifest nonsense — there is an eclipse of all the logical operations of the 
mind which are based on relations and connections. Spitta (1882, 148) 
declares that ideas that occur in dreams seem to be completely withdrawn 
from the law of causality. Radestock (1879, [153-4]) and other writers in- 
sist upon the weakness of judgement and inference characteristic of 
dreams. According to Jodi (1896, 123), there is no critical faculty in 
dreams, no power of correcting one set of perceptions by reference to the 
general content of consciousness. The same author remarks that ‘every 
kind of conscious activity occurs in dreams, but only in an incomplete, in- 
hibited and isolated fashion.’ The contradictions with our waking knowl- 
edge in which dreams are involved are explained by Strieker (1879, 98) 
and many others as being due to facts being forgotten in dreams or to log- 
ical relations between ideas having disappeared. And so on, and so on. 

Nevertheless, the writers who in general take so unfavourable a view 
of psychical functioning in dreams allow that a certain remnant of mental 
activity still remains in them. This is explictly admitted by Wundt, whose 
theories have had a determining influence on so many other workers in 
this field. What, it may be asked, is the nature of the remnant of normal 
mental activity which persists in dreams? There is fairly general agree- 
ment that the reproductive faculty, the memory, seems to have suffered 
least, and indeed that it shows a certain superiority to the same function 
in waking life (see Section B above), though some part of the absurdities 
of dreaming seems to be explicable by its forgetfulness. In the opinion of 
Spitta (1882, 84 f.) the part of the mind which is not affected by sleep is 
the life of the sentiments and it is this which directs dreams. By ‘senti- 
ment’ [ ‘ Gemiit ’] he means ‘the stable assemblage of feelings which con- 
stitutes the innermost subjective essence of a human being.’ 

Scholz (1893, 64) believes that one of the mental activities operating 
in dreams is a tendency to subject the dream-material to ‘re-interpretation 
in allegorical terms.’ Siebeck too (1877, 1 1) sees in dreams a faculty of 
the mind for ‘wider interpretation,’ which is exercised upon all sensations 
and perceptions. There is particular difficulty in assessing the position in 
dreams of what is ostensibly the highest of the psychical functions, that 
of consciousness. Since all that we know of dreams is derived from con- 
sciousness, there can be no doubt of its persisting in them; yet Spitta 
(1882, 84-5) believes that what persists in dreams is only consciousness 



E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams 87 


and not ^^consciousness. Delboeuf (1885, 19), however, confesses that 
he is unable to follow the distinction. 

The laws of association governing the sequence of ideas hold good 
of dream-images, and indeed their dominance is even more clearly and 
strongly expressed in dreams. ‘Dreams,’ says Striimpell (1877, 70), ‘run 
their course, as it seems, according to the laws either of bare ideas or of or- 
ganic stimuli accompanying such ideas — that is, without being in any way 
affected by reflection or commonsense or aesthetic taste or moral judge- 
ment.’ [See pp. 83 f. and 242.] 

The authors whose views I am now giving picture the process of form- 
ing dreams in some such way as this. The totality of the sensory stimuli 
generated during sleep from the various sources which I have already enu- 
merated [see Section C above] arouse in the mind in the first place a 
number of ideas, which are represented in the form of hallucinations or 
more properly, according to Wundt [see p. 71], of illusions, in view of 
their derivation from external and internal stimuli. These ideas become 
linked together according to the familiar laws of association and, accord- 
ing to the same laws, call up a further series of ideas (or images). The 
whole of this material is then worked over, so far as it will allow, by what 
still remain in operation of the organizing and thinking faculties of the 
mind. (See, for instance, Wundt [1874, 658] and Weygandt [1893].) All 
that remain undiscovered are the motives which decide whether the 
calling-up of images arising from non-external sources shall proceed along 
one chain of associations or another. 

It has often been remarked, however, that the associations connecting 
dream-images with one another are of a quite special kind and differ from 
those which operate in waking thought. Thus Volkelt (1875, 15) writes: 
‘In dreams the associations seem to play at catch-as-catch-can in accor- 
dance with chance similarities and connections that are barely perceptible. 
Every dream is stuffed full of slovenly and perfunctory associations of this 
kind.’ Maury (1878, 126) attaches very great importance to this feature of 
the way in which ideas are linked in dreams, since it enables him to draw 
a close analogy between dream-life and certain mental disorders. He spec- 
ifies two main features of a ‘delire: ‘(1) une action spontanee et comme au- 
tomatique de l’esprit; (2) une association vicieuse et irreguliere des idees.’ 1 


[‘(1) A mental act which is spontaneous and as it were automatic; (2) an invalid 
and irregular association of ideas.’ — N.B. In French (and similarly in German) 
psychiatry ‘ delire has the meaning of a delusional state.] 




88 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


Maury himself gives two excellent instances of dreams of his own in which 
dream-images were linked together merely through a similarity in the 
sound of words. He once dreamt that he was on a pilgrimage ( pelerinage ) 
to Jerusalem or Mecca; after many adventures he found himself visiting 
Pelletier, the chemist, who, after some conversation, gave him a zinc shovel 
( pelle)-, in the next part of the dream this turned into a great broad-sword. 
(Ibid., 137.) In another dream he was walking along a highway and read- 
ing the number of kilometres on the milestones; then he was in a grocer’s 
shop where there was a big pair of scales, and a man was putting kilo- 
gramme weights into the scale in order to weigh Maury; the grocer then 
said to him: ‘You’re not in Paris but on the island of Gilolol Several other 
scenes followed, in which he saw a Lobelia flower, and then General Lopez, 
of whose death he had read shortly before. Finally, while he was playing a 
game of lotto, he woke up. (Ibid., 126. )' 

We shall no doubt be prepared to find, however, that this low estimate 
of psychical functioning in dreams has not been allowed to pass without 
contradiction — though contradiction on this point would seem to be no 
easy matter. For instance, Spitta (1882, 118), one of the disparagers of 
dream-life, insists that the same psychological laws which regulate waking 
life also hold good in dreams; and another, Dugas (1897^), declares that 
‘le reve n’est pas deraison ni meme irraison pure.’ 1 2 But such assertions 
carry little weight so long as their authors make no attempt to reconcile 
them with their own descriptions of the psychical anarchy and disruption 
of every function that prevail in dreams. It seems, however, to have 
dawned upon some other writers that the madness of dreams may not be 
without method and may even be simulated, like that of the Danish 
prince on whom this shrewd judgement was passed. These latter writers 
cannot have judged by appearances; or the appearance presented to them 
by dreams must have been a different one. 

Thus Havelock Ellis (1899, 721), without dwelling on the apparent 
absurdity of dreams, speaks of them as ‘an archaic world of vast emotions 
and imperfect thoughts,’ the study of which might reveal to us primitive 
stages in the evolution of mental life. 


1 [ Footnote added 1909:] At a later stage [p. 534 n. 1] we shall come to understand 
the meaning of dreams such as this which are filled with alliterations and similar- 
sounding first syllables. 

2 [‘Dreams are not contrary to reason or even entirely lacking in reason.’] 




E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams 89 


The same view 1 is expressed by James Sully (1893, 362) in a manner 
that is both more sweeping and more penetrating. His words deserve all 
the more attention when we bear in mind that he was more firmly con- 
vinced, perhaps, than any other psychologist that dreams have a disguised 
meaning. ‘Now our dreams are a means of conserving these successive 
[earlier] personalities. When asleep we go back to the old ways of looking at 
things and of feeling about them, to impulses and activities which long ago 
dominated us. ' 

The sagacious Delboeuf (1885, 222) declares (though he puts himself 
in the wrong by not giving any refutation of the material which contra- 
dicts his thesis): ‘Dans le sommeil, hormis la perception, toutes les fac- 
ultes de l’esprit, intelligence, imagination, memoire, volonte, moralite, 
restent intactes dans leur essence; seulement elles s’appliquent a des objets 
imaginaires et mobiles. Le songeur est un acteur qui joue a volonte les 
fous et les sages, les bourreaux et les victimes, les nains et les geants, les 
demons et les anges.’ 2 

The most energetic opponent of those who seek to depreciate psychi- 
cal functioning in dreams seems to be the Marquis d’Hervey de Saint- 
Denys [1867], with whom Maury carried on a lively controversy, and 
whose book, in spite of all my efforts, I have not succeeded in procuring. 3 
Maury (1878, 19) writes of him: ‘M. le Marquis d’Hervey prete a l’intel- 
ligence durant le sommeil, toute sa liberte d’action et d’attention et il ne 
semble faire consister le sommeil que dans l’occlusion des sens, dans leur 
fermeture au monde exterieur; en sorte que fhomme qui dort ne se dis- 
tingue guere, selon sa maniere de voir, de l’homme qui laisse vaguer sa 
pensee en se bouchant les sens; toute la difference qui separe alors la pen- 
see ordinaire de celle du dormeur c’est que, chez celui-ci, l’idee prend une 
forme visible, objective et ressemble, a s’y meprendre, a la sensation deter- 
minee par les objets exterieurs; le souvenir revet fapparence du fait 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.] 

2 [‘In sleep, all the mental faculties (except for perception) — intelligence, imagi- 
nation, memory, will and morality — remain essentially intact; they are merely 
applied to imaginary and unstable objects. A dreamer is an actor who at his own 
will plays the parts of madmen and philosophers, of executioners and their vic- 
tims, of dwarfs and giants, of demons and angels.’] 

3 [This work, by a famous sinologist, was published anonymously.] 




90 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


present.’ 1 To this Maury adds ‘qu’il y a une difference de plus et capitale 
a savoir que les facultes intellectuelles de fhomme endormi n’offrent pas 
l’equilibre qu’elles gardent chez l’homme eveille.’ 2 

Vaschide (1911, 146 f.) 3 gives us a clearer account of Hervey de Saint- 
Denys’ book and quotes a passage from it [1867, 35] upon the apparent 
incoherence of dreams: ‘L’image du reve est la copie de l’idee. Le princi- 
pal est l’idee; la vision n’est qu’accessoire. Ceci etabli, il faut savoir suivre 
la marche des idees, il faut savoir analyser le tissu des reves; l’incoherence 
devient alors comprehensible, les conceptions les plus fantasques devien- 
nent des faits simples et parfaitement logiques. . . . Les reves les plus 
bizarres trouvent meme une explication des plus logiques quand on sait 
les analyser.’ 4 

Johan Starcke (1913, 243) has pointed out that a similar explanation 
of the incoherence of dreams was put forward by an earlier writer, Wolf 
Davidson (1799, 136), whose work was unknown to me: ‘The remark- 
able leaps taken by our ideas in dreams all have their basis in the law of 
association; sometimes, however, these connections occur in the mind 
very obscurely, so that our ideas often seem to have taken a leap when in 
fact there has been none.’ 


1 [‘The Marquis d’Hervey attributes complete liberty of action and attention to 
the intelligence during sleep, and he seems to think that sleep consists merely in 
the blocking of the senses, in their being closed to the external world. So that on 
his view a sleeping man would hardly be different from a man who shut off his 
senses and allowed his thoughts to wander; the only distinction between ordi- 
nary thoughts and those of a sleeper would be that, in the latter, ideas assume a 
visible and objective shape and are indistinguishable from sensations determined 
by external objects, while memories take on the appearance of present events.’] 

1 [‘There is a further distinction and one of capital importance: namely, that the 
intellectual faculties of a sleeping man do not exhibit the balance maintained in 
a man who is awake.’] 

3 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1914.] 

4 [‘Dream-images are copies of ideas. The essential thing is the idea, the vision is 
a mere accessory. When this is once established, we must know how to follow 
the sequence of the ideas, we must know how to analyse the texture of dreams; 
their incoherence then becomes intelligible, and the most fantastic notions be- 
come simple and perfectly logical facts. . . . We can even find a most logical ex- 
planation for the strangest dreams if we know how to analyse them.’ — This is 
not in fact a verbatim quotation from Hervey de Saint-Denys, but a paraphrase 
by Vaschide.] 




E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams 91 


The literature of the subject thus shows a very wide range of variation 
in the value which it assigns to dreams as psychical products. This range 
extends from the deepest disparagement, of the kind with which we have 
become familiar, through hints at a yet undisclosed worth, to an overval- 
uation which ranks dreams far higher than any of the functions of waking 
life. Hildebrandt (1875, 19 f.), who, as we have heard [see above, p. 43], 
has summed up the whole of the psychological features of dream-life in 
three antinomies, makes use of the two extreme ends of this range of val- 
ues for his third paradox: ‘it is a contrast between an intensification of 
mental life, an enhancement of it that not infrequently amounts to virtu- 
osity, and, on the other hand, a deterioration and enfeeblement which of- 
ten sinks below the level of humanity. As regards the former, there are few 
of us who could not affirm, from our own experience, that there emerges 
from time to time in the creations and fabrics of the genius of dreams a 
depth and intimacy of emotion, a tenderness of feeling, a clarity of vision, 
a subtlety of observation, and a brilliance of wit such as we should never 
claim to have at our permanent command in our waking lives. There lies 
in dreams a marvellous poetry, an apt allegory, an incomparable humour, 
a rare irony. A dream looks upon the world in a light of strange idealism 
and often enhances the effects of what it sees by its deep understanding 
of their essential nature. It pictures earthly beauty to our eyes in a truly 
heavenly splendour and clothes dignity with the highest majesty, it shows 
us our everyday fears in the ghastliest shape and turns our amusement 
into jokes of indescribable pungency. And sometimes, when we are awake 
and still under the full impact of an experience like one of these, we can- 
not but feel that never in our life has the real world offered us its equal.’ 

We may well ask whether the disparaging remarks quoted on earlier 
pages and this enthusiastic eulogy can possibly relate to the same thing. 
Is it that some of our authorities have overlooked the nonsensical dreams 
and others the profound and subtle ones? And if dreams of both kinds oc- 
cur, dreams that justify both estimates, may it not be a waste of time to 
look for any distinguishing psychological feature of dreams? Will it not 
be enough to say that in dreams anything is possible — from the deepest 
degradation of mental life to an exaltation of it which is rare in waking 
hours? However convenient a solution of this kind might be, what lies 
against it is the fact that all of the efforts at research into the problem of 
dreams seem to be based on a conviction that some distinguishing feature 
does exist, which is universally valid in its essential outline and which 
would clear these apparent contradictions out of the way. 



92 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


There can be no doubt that the psychical achievements of dreams re- 
ceived readier and warmer recognition during the intellectual period 
which has now been left behind, when the human mind was dominated 
by philosophy and not by the exact natural sciences. Pronouncements 
such as that by Schubert (1814, 20 f.) that dreams are a liberation of the 
spirit from the power of external nature, a freeing of the soul from the 
bonds of the senses, and similar remarks by the younger Fichte (1864, 1, 
143 f.) 1 and others, all of which represent dreams as an elevation of men- 
tal life to a higher level, seem to us now to be scarcely intelligible; today 
they are repeated only by mystics and pietists. 2 The introduction of the 
scientific mode of thought has brought along with it a reaction in the es- 
timation of dreams. Medical writers in especial tend to regard psychical 
activity in dreams as trivial and valueless; while philosophers and non- 
professional observers — amateur psychologists — whose contributions to 
this particular subject are not to be despised, have (in closer alignment 
with popular feeling) retained a belief in the psychical value of dreams. 
Anyone who is inclined to take a low view of psychical functioning in 
dreams will naturally prefer to assign their source to somatic stimulation; 
whereas those who believe that the dreaming mind retains the greater part 
of its waking capacities have of course no reason for denying that the 
stimulus to dreaming can arise within the dreaming mind itself. 

Of the superior faculties which even a sober comparison may be in- 
clined to attribute to dream-life, the most marked is that of memory; we 
have already [in Section B above] discussed at length the not uncommon 
evidence in favour of this view. Another point of superiority in dream- 
life, often praised by earlier writers — that it rises superior to distance in 
time and space — may easily be shown to have no basis in fact. As Hilde- 
brandt (1875, [25]) points out, this advantage is an illusory one; for 
dreaming rises superior to time and space in precisely the same way as 
does waking thought, and for the very reason that it is merely a form of 
thought. It has been claimed for dreams that they enjoy yet another ad- 
vantage over waking life in relation to time — that they are independent 
of the passage of time in yet another respect. Dreams such as the one 


1 Cf. Haffner (1887) and Spitta (1882, 1 1 £). 

2 [Footnote added 1914:] That brilliant mystic Du Prel, one of the few authors for 
whose neglect in earlier editions of this book I should wish to express my regret, 
declares that the gateway to metaphysics, so far as men are concerned, lies not 
in waking life but in the dream. (Du Prel, 1885, 59.) 




F. The Moral Sense in Dreams 


93 


dreamt by Maury of his own guillotining (see above, p. 58) seem to show 
that a dream is able to compress into a very short space of time an 
amount of perceptual matter far greater than the amount of ideational 
matter that can be dealt with by our waking mind. This conclusion has 
however been countered by various arguments; since the papers by Le 
Lorrain (1894) and Egger (1895) on the apparent duration of dreams, a 
long and interesting discussion on the subject has developed, but it seems 
unlikely that the last word has yet been said on this subtle question and 
the deep implications which it involves. 1 

Reports of numerous cases as well as the collection of instances made 
by Chabaneix (1897) seem to put it beyond dispute that dreams can carry 
on the intellectual work of daytime and bring it to conclusions which had 
not been reached during the day, and that they can resolve doubts and 
problems and be the source of new inspiration for poets and musical 
composers. But though the fact may be beyond dispute, its implications 
are open to many doubts, which raise matters of principle. 2 

Lastly, dreams are reputed to have the power of divining the future. 
Here we have a conflict in which almost insuperable scepticism is met by 
obstinately repeated assertions. No doubt we shall be acting rightly in not 
insisting that this view has no basis at all in fact, since it is possible that 
before long a number of the instances cited may find an explanation 
within the bounds of natural psychology. 3 


(F) 

THE MORAL SENSE IN DREAMS 

For reasons which will only become apparent after my own investiga- 
tions into dreams have been taken into account, I have isolated from the 
subject of the psychology of dreams the special problem of whether and 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] A further bibliography and a critical discussion of these 
problems will be found in Tobowolska (1900). [Cf. also pp. 500 £] 

2 \Footnote added 1914:] Cf. the criticism in Havelock Ellis (1911, 265). [See also 
below, p. 563 £] 

3 [Cf. the posthumously published paper by Freud (1941c) printed as an Appen- 
dix at the end of this work (p. 617).] 




94 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


to what extent moral dispositions and feelings extend into dream-life. 
Here too we are met by the same contradictory views which, curiously 
enough, we have found adopted by different authors in regard to all the 
other functions of the mind during dreams. Some assert that the dictates 
of morality have no place in dreams, while others maintain no less posi- 
tively that the moral character of man persists in his dream-life. 

Appeal to the common experience of dreams seems to establish be- 
yond any doubt the correctness of the former of these views. Jessen 
(1855, 553) writes: ‘Nor do we become better or more virtuous in sleep. 
On the contrary, conscience seems to be silent in dreams, for we feel no 
pity in them and may commit the worst crimes — theft, violence and 
murder — with complete indifference and with no subsequent feelings of 
remorse.’ 

Radestock (1879, 164): ‘It should be borne in mind that associations 
occur and ideas are linked together in dreams without any regard for re- 
flection, common sense, aesthetic taste or moral judgement. Judgement 
is extremely weak and ethical indifference reigns supreme.’ 

Volkelt (1875, 23): ‘In dreams, as we are all aware, proceedings are es- 
pecially unbridled in sexual matters. The dreamer himself is utterly 
shameless and devoid of any moral feeling or judgement; moreover, he 
sees everyone else, including those for whom he has the deepest respect, 
engaged in acts with which he would be horrified to associate them while 
he was awake, even in his thoughts.’ 

In diametrical opposition to these, we find statements such as 
Schopenhauer’s [1862, 1, 245] that everyone who figures in a dream acts 
and speaks in complete accordance with his character. K. P. Fischer 
(1850, 72 fi), quoted by Spitta (1882, 188), declares that subjective feel- 
ings and longings, or affects and passions, reveal themselves in the free- 
dom of dream-life, and that people’s moral characteristics are reflected in 
their dreams. 

Haffner (1884, 251): ‘With rare exceptions ... a virtuous man will be 
virtuous in his dreams as well; he will resist temptations and will keep 
himself aloof from hatred, envy, anger and all other vices. But a sinful 
man will as a rule find in his dreams the same images that he had before 
his eyes while he was awake.’ 

Scholz [Jewett’s translation, 1893, 62]: ‘In dreams is truth: in dreams 
we learn to know ourselves as we are in spite of all the disguises we wear 
to the world, [whether they be ennobling or humiliating] .... The hon- 
ourable man cannot commit a crime in dreams, or if he does he is horri- 



F. The Moral Sense in Dreams 


95 


fied over it as over something contrary to his nature. The Roman Em- 
peror who put a man to death who had dreamt that he had assassinated 
the ruler, was justified in so doing if he reasoned that the thoughts one 
has in dreams, one has, too, when awake. The common expression “I 
wouldn’t dream of such a thing” has a doubly correct significance when 
it refers to something which can have no lodgement in our hearts or 
mind.’ (Plato, on the contrary, thought that the best men are those who 
only dream what other men do in their waking life.) 1 

Pfaff (1868, [9]), quoted by Spitta (1882, 192), alters the wording of 
a familiar saying: ‘Tell me some of your dreams, and I will tell you about 
your inner self.’ 

The problem of morality in dreams is taken as the centre of interest by 
Hildebrandt, from whose small volume I have already quoted so much — 
for, of all the contributions to the study of dreams which I have come 
across, it is the most perfect in form and the richest in ideas. Hildebrandt 
[1875, 54] too lays it down as a rule that the purer the life the purer the 
dream, and the more impure the one the more impure the other. He be- 
lieves that man’s moral nature persists in dreams. ‘Whereas,’ he writes, 
‘even the grossest mistake in arithmetic, even the most romantic reversal 
of scientific laws, even the most ridiculous anachronism fails to upset us 
or even to arouse our suspicions, yet we never lose sight of the distinction 
between good and evil, between right and wrong or between virtue and 
vice. However much of what accompanies us in the daytime may drop 
away in our sleeping hours, Kant’s categorical imperative is a companion 
who follows so close at our heels that we cannot be free of it even in 
sleep. . . . But this can only be explained by the fact that what is funda- 
mental in man’s nature, his moral being, is too firmly fixed to be affected 
by the kaleidoscopic shuffling to which the imagination, the reason, the 
memory and other such faculties must submit in dreams.’ (Ibid., 45 f.) 

As the discussion of this subject proceeds, however, both groups of 
writers begin to exhibit remarkable shifts and inconsistencies in their opin- 
ions. Those who maintain that the moral personality of man ceases to op- 
erate in dreams should, in strict logic, lose all interest in immoral dreams. 
They could rule out any attempt at holding a dreamer responsible for his 
dreams, or at deducing from the wickedness of his dreams that he had an 


1 [This sentence was added in 1914. Cf. also p. 614. The reference is no doubt to 
the opening sections of Book IX of the Republic. (Trans., 1871, 409 f.)] 




96 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


evil streak in his character, just as confidently as they would reject a similar 
attempt at deducing from the absurdity of his dreams that his intellectual 
activities in waking life were worthless. The other group, who believe that 
the ‘categorical imperative’ extends to dreams, should logically accept un- 
qualified responsibility for immoral dreams. We could only hope for their 
sake that they would have no such reprehensible dreams of their own to 
upset their firm belief in their own moral character. 

It appears, however, that no one is as confident as all that of how far 
he is good or bad, and that no one can deny the recollection of immoral 
dreams of his own. For writers in both groups, irrespective of the opposi- 
tion between their opinions on dream-morality, make efforts at explain- 
ing the origin of immoral dreams; and a fresh difference of opinion 
develops, according as their origin is sought in the functions of the mind 
or in deleterious effects produced on the mind by somatic causes. Thus 
the compelling logic of facts forces the supporters of both the responsi- 
bility and the irresponsibility of dream-life to unite in recognizing that 
the immorality of dreams has a specific psychical source. 

Those who believe that morality extends to dreams are, however, all 
careful to avoid assuming complete responsibility for their dreams. Thus 
Haffner (1887, 250) writes: ‘We are not responsible for our dreams, since 
our thought and will have been deprived in them of the basis upon which 
alone our life possesses truth and reality . . . For that reason no dream- 
wishes or dream-actions can be virtuous or sinful.’ Nevertheless, he goes 
on, men are responsible for their sinful dreams in so far as they cause 
them indirectly. They have the duty of morally cleansing their minds not 
only in their waking life but more especially before going to sleep. 

Hildebrandt [1875, 48 £] presents us with a far deeper analysis of this 
mingled rejection and acceptance of responsibility for the moral content 
of dreams. He argues that in considering the immoral appearance of 
dreams allowance must be made for the dramatic form in which they are 
couched, for their compression of the most complicated processes of re- 
flection into the briefest periods of time, as well as for the way in which, 
as even he admits, the ideational elements of dreams become confused 
and deprived of their significance. He confesses that he has the greatest 
hesitation, nevertheless, in thinking that all responsibility for sins and 
faults in dreams can be repudiated. 

‘When we are anxious to disown some unjust accusation, especially 
one that relates to our aims and intentions, we often use the phrase “I 
should never dream of such a thing.” We are in that way expressing, on 



F. The Moral Sense in Dreams 


97 


the one hand, our feeling that the region of dreams is the most remote 
and furthest in which we are answerable for our thoughts, since thoughts 
in that region are so loosely connected with our essential self that they are 
scarcely to be regarded as ours; but nevertheless, since we feel obliged ex- 
pressly to deny the existence of these thoughts in this region, we are at the 
same time admitting indirectly that our self- justification would not be 
complete unless it extended so far. And I think that in this we are speak- 
ing, although unconsciously, the language of truth.’ (Ibid., 49.) 

‘It is impossible to think of any action in a dream for which the original 
motive has not in some way or other — whether as a wish, or desire or 
impulse — passed through the waking mind.’ We must admit, Hildebrandt 
proceeds, that this original impulse was not invented by the dream; the 
dream merely copied it and spun it out, it merely elaborated in dramatic 
form a scrap of historical material which it had found in us; it merely 
dramatized the Apostle’s words: ‘Whosoever hateth his brother is a mur- 
derer.’ [1 John iii, 15.] And although after we have awoken, conscious of 
our moral strength, we may smile at the whole elaborate structure of the 
sinful dream, yet the original material from which the structure was de- 
rived will fail to raise a smile. We feel responsible for the dreamer’s 
errors — not for the whole amount of them, but for a certain percentage. 
‘In short, if we understand in this scarcely disputable sense Christ’s saying 
that “out of the heart proceed evil thoughts” [Matt, xv, 19], we can hardly 
escape the conviction that a sin committed in a dream bears with it at least 
an obscure minimum of guilt.’ (Hildebrandt, 1875, 51 ff.) 

Thus Hildebrandt finds the source of immorality in dreams in the germs 
and hints of evil impulses which, in the form of temptations, pass through 
our minds during the day; and he does not hesitate to include these im- 
moral elements in his estimate of a person’s moral value. These same 
thoughts, as we know, and this same estimate of them, are what have led 
the pious and saintly in every age to confess themselves miserable sinners. 1 

There can of course be no doubt as to the general existence of such in- 
compatible ideas; they occur in most people and in spheres other than 


1 \Footnote added 1914:] It is of some interest to learn the attitude of the Inquisi- 
tion to our problem. In Caesar Carena’s Tractatus de Officio sanctissimae Inquisi- 
tionis, 1659, the following passage occurs: ‘If anyone speaks heresies in a dream, 
the inquisitors should take occasion to enquire into his way of life, for what oc- 
cupies a man during the day is wont to come again in his sleep.’ (Communi- 
cated by Dr. Ehniger, St. Urban, Switzerland.) 




98 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


that of ethics. Sometimes, however, they have been judged less seriously. 
Spitta (1882, 194) quotes some remarks by Zeller [1818, 120-1], which 
are relevant in this connection: ‘A mind is seldom so happily organized as 
to possess complete power at every moment and not to have the regular 
and clear course of its thoughts constantly interrupted not only by 
inessential but by positively grotesque and nonsensical ideas. Indeed, the 
greatest thinkers have had to complain of this dreamlike, teasing and tor- 
menting rabble of ideas, which have disturbed their deepest reflections 
and their most solemn and earnest thoughts.’ 

A more revealing light is thrown upon the psychological position of 
these incompatible thoughts by another remark of Hildebrandt’s (1875, 
55), to the effect that dreams give us an occasional glimpse into depths and 
recesses of our nature to which we usually have no access in our waking 
state. Kant expresses the same idea in a passage in his Anthropologie [1798] 1 
in which he declares that dreams seem to exist in order to show us our hid- 
den natures and to reveal to us, not what we are, but what we might have 
been if we had been brought up differently. Radestock (1879, 84), too, says 
that dreams often do no more than reveal to us what we would not admit 
to ourselves and that it is therefore unfair of us to stigmatize them as liars 
and deceivers. Erdmann [1852, 115] writes: ‘Dreams have never shown me 
what I ought to think of a man; but I have occasionally learnt from a 
dream, greatly to my own astonishment, what I do think of a man and how 
I feel towards him.’ Similarly I. H. Fichte (1864, 1, 539) remarks: ‘The na- 
ture of our dreams gives a far more truthful reflection of our whole disposi- 
tion than we are able to learn of it from self-observation in waking life.’ 2 

It will be seen that the emergence of impulses which are foreign to our 
moral consciousness is merely analogous to what we have already learnt — 
the fact that dreams have access to ideational material which is absent in 
our waking state or plays but a small part in it. Thus Benini (1898) writes: 
‘Certe nostre inclinazioni che si credevano soffocate e spente da un pezzo, 
si ridestano; passioni vecchie e sepolte rivivono; cose e persone a cui non 
pensiamo mai, ci vengono dinanzi.’ 3 And Volkelt (1875, 105): ‘Ideas, too, 
which have entered waking consciousness almost unnoticed and have per- 


1 [Not traceable.] 

1 [The last two sentences were added in 1914.] 

3 [‘Certain of our desires which have seemed for a time to be stifled and extin- 
guished are re-awakened; old and buried passions come to life again; things and 
persons of whom we never think appear before us.’] 




F. The Moral Sense in Dreams 


99 


haps never again been called to memory, very frequently announce their 
presence in the mind through dreams.’ At this point, finally, we may recall 
Schleiermacher’s assertion [see above, p. 78] that the act of falling asleep 
is accompanied by the appearance of ‘involuntary ideas’ or images. 

We may, then, class together under the heading of ‘involuntary ideas’ 
the whole of the ideational material the emergence of which, alike in im- 
moral and in absurd dreams, causes us so much bewilderment. There is, 
however, one important point of difference: involuntary ideas in the 
moral sphere contradict our usual attitude of mind, whereas the others 
merely strike us as strange. No step has yet been taken towards a deeper 
knowledge which would resolve this distinction. 

The question next arises as to the significance of the appearance of in- 
voluntary ideas in dreams, as to the light which the emergence during the 
night of these morally incompatible impulses throws upon the psychology 
of the waking and dreaming mind. And here we find a fresh division of 
opinion and yet another different grouping of the authorities. The line of 
thought adopted by Hildebrandt and others who share his fundamental 
position inevitably leads to the view that immoral impulses possess a cer- 
tain degree of power even in waking life, though it is an inhibited power, 
unable to force its way into action, and that in sleep something is put out 
of action which acts like an inhibition in the daytime and has prevented 
us from being aware of the existence of such impulses. Thus dreams would 
reveal the true nature of man, though not his whole nature, and they 
would constitute one means of rendering the hidden interior of the mind 
accessible to our knowledge. Only upon some such premises as these can 
Hildebrandt [1875, 56] base his attribution to dreams of warning powers, 
which draw our attention to moral infirmities in our mind, just as physi- 
cians admit that dreams can bring unobserved physical illnesses to our 
conscious notice. So, too, Spitta must be adopting this view when, in 
speaking [1882, 193 £] of the sources of excitation which impinge upon 
the mind (at puberty, for instance), he consoles the dreamer with the as- 
surance that he will have done all that lies within his power if he leads a 
strictly virtuous life in his waking hours, and if he takes care to suppress 
sinful thoughts whenever they arise and to prevent their maturing and 
turning into acts. According to this view we might define the ‘involuntary 
ideas’ as ideas which had been ‘suppressed’ during the day, and we should 
have to regard their emergence as a genuine mental phenomenon. 

Other writers, however, regard this last conclusion as unjustifiable. Thus 
Jessen (1855) believes that involuntary ideas, both in dreams and in waking, 



100 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


and in feverish and other delirious conditions, ‘have the character of a voli- 
tional activity that has been put to rest and of a more or less mechanical suc- 
cession of images and ideas provoked by internal impulses.’ All that an 
immoral dream proves as to the dreamer’s mental life is, in Jessen’s view, that 
on some occasion he had cognizance of the ideational content in question; 
it is certainly no evidence of a mental impulse of the dreamer’s own. 

As regards another writer, Maury, it would almost seem as though he 
too attributes to the dreaming condition a capacity, not for the arbitrary 
destruction of mental activity, but for analysing it into its components. 
He writes as follows of dreams which transgress the bounds of morality: 
‘Ce sont nos penchants qui parlent et qui nous font agir, sans que la con- 
science nous retienne, bien que parfois elle nous avertisse. J’ai mes defauts 
et mes penchants vicieux; a l’etat de veille je tache de lutter contre eux, et 
il m’arrive assez souvent de n’y pas succomber. Mais dans mes songes j’y 
succombe toujours ou pour mieux dire j’agis par leur impulsion, sans 
crainte et sans remords. . . . Evidemment les visions qui se deroulent de- 
vant ma pensee et qui constituent le reve, me sont suggerees par les inci- 
tations que je ressens et que ma volonte absente ne cherche pas a refouler.’ 
(Maury, 1878, 113.) 1 

No one who believes in the capacity of dreams to reveal an immoral 
tendency of the dreamer’s which is really present though suppressed or 
concealed, could express his view more precisely than in Maury’s words: 
‘En reve l’homme se revele done tout entier a soi-meme dans sa nudite et 
sa misere natives. Des qu’il suspend l’exercice de sa volonte, il devient le 
jouet de toutes les passions contres lesquelles, a l’etat de veille, la con- 
science, le sentiment de l’honneur, la crainte nous defendent.’ (Ibid., 
165. ) 2 In another passage we find these pertinent sentences: ‘Dans le 


1 [‘It is our impulses that are speaking and making us act, while our conscience 
does not hold us back, though it sometimes warns us. I have my faults and my 
vicious impulses; while I am awake I try to resist them, and quite often I succeed 
in not yielding to them. But in my dreams I always yield to them, or rather I act 
under their pressure without fear or remorse. . . . The visions which unroll be- 
fore my mind and which constitute a dream are clearly suggested by the urges 
which I feel and which my absent will does not attempt to repress.’] 

1 [‘Thus in dreams a man stands self-revealed in all his native nakedness and 
poverty. As soon as he suspends the exercise of his will, he becomes the plaything 
of all the passions against which he is defended while he is awake by his con- 
science, his sense of honour and his fears.’] 




G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function 101 


songe, c’est surtout l’homme instinctif qui se revele. . . . L’homme revient 
pour ainsi dire a l’etat de nature quand il reve; mais moins les idees ac- 
quises ont penetre dans son esprit, plus les penchants en disaccord avec 
elles conservent encore sur lui l’influence dans le reve.’ (Ibid., 462.) 1 He 
goes on to relate by way of example how in his dreams he is not infre- 
quently the victim of the very superstition which he has been attacking 
in his writings with particular vehemence. 

These penetrating reflections of Maury’s, however, lose their value in 
the investigation of dream-life owing to the fact that he regards the phe- 
nomena which he has observed with such accuracy as no more than 
proofs of an ‘ antomatisme psychologique which, in his view, dominates 
dreams and which he looks upon as the exact opposite of mental activity. 

Strieker (1879, [51]) writes: ‘Dreams do not consist solely of illusions. 
If, for instance, one is afraid of robbers in a dream, the robbers, it is true, 
are imaginary — but the fear is real.’ This calls our attention to the fact 
that affects in dreams cannot be judged in the same way as the remainder 
of their content; and we are faced by the problem of what part of the psy- 
chical processes occurring in dreams is to be regarded as real, that is to say, 
has a claim to be classed among the psychical processes of waking life. 2 


(G) 

THEORIES OF DREAMING AND ITS FUNCTION 

Any disquisition upon dreams which seeks to explain as many as possible 
of their observed characteristics from a particular point of view, and 
which at the same time defines the position occupied by dreams in a 
wider sphere of phenomena, deserves to be called a theory of dreams. The 
various theories will be found to differ in that they select one or the other 


1 [‘What is revealed in dreams is primarily the man of instinct. . . . Man may be 
said to return in his dreams to a state of nature. But the less his mind has been 
penetrated by acquired ideas, the more it remains influenced in dreams by im- 
pulses of a contrary nature.’] 

2 [The question of affects in dreams is discussed in Section H of Chapter VI 
(pp. 466 ff.) . The whole topic of moral responsibility for dreams is touched upon 
below on pp. 613 f. and considered at greater length in Section B of Freud 19256] 




102 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


characteristic of dreams as the essential one and take it as the point of de- 
parture for their explanations and correlations. It need not necessarily be 
possible to infer a function of dreaming (whether utilitarian or otherwise) 
from the theory. Nevertheless, since we have a habit of looking for teleo- 
logical explanations, we shall be more ready to accept theories which are 
bound up with the attribution of a function to dreaming. 

We have already made the acquaintance of several sets of views which 
deserve more or less to be called theories of dreams in this sense of the 
term. The belief held in antiquity that dreams were sent by the gods in or- 
der to guide the actions of men was a complete theory of dreams, giving 
information on everything worth knowing about them. Since dreams have 
become an object of scientific research a considerable number of theories 
have been developed, including some that are extremely incomplete. 

Without attempting any exhaustive enumeration, we may try to di- 
vide theories of dreams into the following three rough groups, according 
to their underlying assumptions as to the amount and nature of psychical 
activity in dreams. 

(1) There are the theories, such as that of Delboeuf [1885, 221 £], ac- 
cording to which the whole of psychical activity continues in dreams. The 
mind, they assume, does not sleep and its apparatus remains intact; but, 
since it falls under the conditions of the state of sleep, which differ from 
those of waking life, its normal functioning necessarily produces different 
results during sleep. The question arises in regard to these theories whether 
they are capable of deriving all the distinctions between dreams and waking 
thought from the conditions of the state of sleep. Moreover, there is no pos- 
sibility of their being able to suggest any function for dreaming; they offer 
no reason why we should dream, why the complicated mechanism of the 
mental apparatus should continue to operate even when set in circum- 
stances for which it appears undesigned. Either dreamless sleep or, if dis- 
turbing stimuli intervene, awakening, would seem to be the only expedient 
reactions — rather than the third alternative of dreaming. 

(2) There are the theories which, on the contrary, presuppose that 
dreams imply a lowering of psychical activity, a loosening of connections, 
and an impoverishment of the material accessible. These theories must 
imply the attribution to sleep of characteristics quite different from those 
suggested, for instance, by Delboeuf. Sleep, according to such theories, 
has a far-reaching influence upon the mind; it does not consist merely in 



G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function 103 


the mind being shut off from the external world; it forces its way, rather, 
into the mental mechanism and throws it temporarily out of use. If I may 
venture on a simile from the sphere of psychiatry, the first group of 
theories construct dreams on the model of paranoia, while the second 
group make them resemble mental deficiency or confusional states. 

The theory according to which only a fragment of mental activity 
finds expression in dreams, since it has been paralysed by sleep, is by far 
the most popular with medical writers and in the scientific world gener- 
ally. In so far as any general interest may be supposed to exist in the ex- 
planation of dreams, this may be described as the ruling theory. It is to be 
remarked how easily this theory avoids the worst stumbling-block in the 
way of any explanation of dreams — the difficulty of dealing with the con- 
tradictions involved in them. It regards dreams as a result of a partial 
awakening — ‘a gradual, partial and at the same time highly abnormal 
awakening,’ to quote a remark of Herbart’s upon dreams (1892, 307). 
Thus, this theory can make use of a series of conditions of ever-increasing 
wakefulness, culminating in the completely waking state, in order to ac- 
count for the series of variations in efficiency of mental functioning in 
dreams, ranging from the inefficiency revealed by their occasional absurd- 
ity up to fully concentrated intellectual functioning. [See p. 203.] 

Those who find that they cannot dispense with a statement in terms 
of physiology, or to whom a statement in such terms seems more scien- 
tific, will find what they want in the account given by Binz (1878, 43): 
‘This condition’ (of torpor) ‘comes to an end in the early hours of the 
morning, but only by degrees. The products of fatigue which have accu- 
mulated in the albumen of the brain gradually diminish; more and more 
of them are decomposed or eliminated by the unceasing flow of the 
blood-stream. Here and there separate groups of cells begin to emerge 
into wakefulness, while the torpid state still persists all around them. The 
isolated work of these separate groups now appears before our clouded 
consciousness, unchecked by other portions of the brain which govern 
the process of association. For that reason the images produced, which 
correspond for the most part to material impressions of the more recent 
past, are strung together in a wild and irregular manner. The number of 
the liberated brain cells constantly grows and the senselessness of the 
dreams correspondingly diminishes.’ 

This view of dreaming as an incomplete, partial waking state is no 
doubt to be found in the writings of every modern physiologist and philos- 
opher. The most elaborate exposition of it is given by Maury (1878, 6 £). 



104 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


It often appears as though that author imagined that the waking or sleep- 
ing state could be shifted from one anatomical region to another, each 
particular anatomical region being linked to one particular psychical 
function. I will merely remark at this point that, even if the theory of par- 
tial waking were confirmed, its details would still remain very much open 
to discussion. 

This view naturally leaves no room for assigning any function to 
dreaming. The logical conclusion that follows from it as to the position 
and significance of dreams is correctly stated by Binz (1878, 35): ‘Every 
observed fact forces us to conclude that dreams must be characterized as 
somatic processes, which are in every case useless and in many cases posi- 
tively pathological. 

The application to dreams of the term ‘somatic,’ which is italicized by 
Binz himself, has more than one bearing. It alludes, in the first place, to 
the aetiology of dreams which seemed particularly plausible to Binz when 
he studied the experimental production of dreams by the use of toxic sub- 
stances. For theories of this kind involve a tendency to limit the instiga- 
tion of dreams so far as possible to somatic causes. Put in its most extreme 
form the view is as follows. Once we have put ourselves to sleep by ex- 
cluding all stimuli, there is no need and no occasion for dreaming until 
the morning, when the process of being gradually awakened by the im- 
pact of fresh stimuli might be reflected in the phenomenon of dreaming. 
It is impracticable, however, to keep our sleep free from stimuli; they im- 
pinge upon the sleeper from all sides — like the germs of life of which 
Mephistopheles complained 1 — from without and from within and even 
from parts of his body which are quite unnoticed in waking life. Thus 
sleep is disturbed; first one corner of the mind is shaken into wakefulness 
and then another; the mind functions for a brief moment with its awak- 
ened portion and is then glad to fall asleep once more. Dreams are a reac- 
tion to the disturbance of sleep brought about by a stimulus — a reaction, 
incidentally, which is quite superfluous. 

But the description of dreaming — which, after all is said and done, re- 
mains a function of the mind — as a somatic process implies another 
meaning as well. It is intended to show that dreams are unworthy to rank 


1 [In his first conversation with Faust (Part I, [Scene 3]), Mephistopheles com- 
plained bitterly that his destructive efforts were perpetually frustrated by the 
emergence of thousands of fresh germs of life. The whole passage is quoted by 
Freud in a footnote to Section VI of Civilization and Its Discontents (193CW).] 




G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function 105 


as psychical processes. Dreaming has often been compared with ‘the ten 
fingers of a man who knows nothing of music wandering over the keys of 
a piano’ [Striimpell, 1877, 84; cf. p. 242 below]; and this simile shows as 
well as anything the sort of opinion that is usually held of dreaming by 
representatives of the exact sciences. On this view a dream is something 
wholly and completely incapable of interpretation; for how could the ten 
fingers of an unmusical player produce a piece of music? 

Even in the distant past there was no lack of critics of the theory of 
partial waking. Thus Burdach (1838, 508 f.) wrote: ‘When it is said that 
dreams are a partial waking, in the first place this throws no light either 
on waking or on sleeping, and in the second place it says no more than 
that some mental forces are active in dreams while others are at rest. But 
variability of this kind occurs throughout life.’ 

This ruling theory, which regards dreams as a somatic process, underlies 
a most interesting hypothesis put forward for the first time by Robert in 
1886. It is particularly attractive since it is able to suggest a function, a util- 
itarian purpose, for dreaming. Robert takes as the groundwork of his theory 
two facts of observation which we have already considered in the course of 
our examination of the material of dreams (see above, pp. 51 ffi), namely 
that we dream so frequently of the most trivial daily impressions and that 
we so rarely carry over into our dreams our important daily interests. 
Robert (1886, 10) asserts that it is universally true that things which we 
have thoroughly thought out never become instigators of dreams but only 
things which are in our minds in an uncompleted shape or which have 
merely been touched upon by our thoughts in passing: ‘The reason why it 
is usually impossible to explain dreams is precisely because they are caused 
by sensory impressions of the preceding day which failed to attract enough 
of the dreamer’s attention.’ [Ibid., 19-20.] Thus the condition which de- 
termines whether an impression shall find its way into a dream is whether 
the process of working over the impression was interrupted or whether the 
impression was too unimportant to have a right to be worked over at all. 

Robert describes dreams as ‘a somatic process of excretion of which we 
become aware in our mental reaction to it.’ [Ibid., 9.] Dreams are excre- 
tions of thoughts that have been stifled at birth. ‘A man deprived of the 
capacity for dreaming would in course of time become mentally de- 
ranged, because a great mass of uncompleted, unworked-out thoughts 
and superficial impressions would accumulate in his brain and would be 
bound by their bulk to smother the thoughts which should be assimilated 
into his memory as completed wholes.’ [Ibid., 10.] Dreams serve as a 



106 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


safety-valve for the over-burdened brain. They possess the power to heal 
and relieve. (Ibid., 32.) 

We should be misunderstanding Robert if we were to ask him how it 
can come about that the mind is relieved through the presentation of 
ideas in dreams. What Robert is clearly doing is to infer from these two 
features of the material of dreams that by some means or other an expul- 
sion of worthless impressions is accomplished during sleep as a somatic 
process, and that dreaming is not a special sort of psychical process but 
merely the information we receive of that expulsion. Moreover, excretion 
is not the only event which occurs in the mind at night. Robert himself 
adds that, besides this, the suggestions arising during the previous day are 
worked out and that ‘whatever parts of the undigested thoughts are not 
excreted are bound together into a rounded whole by threads of thought 
borrowed from the imagination and thus inserted in the memory as a 
harmless imaginative picture.’ (Ibid., 23.) 

But Robert’s theory is diametrically opposed to the ruling one in its es- 
timate of the nature of the sources of dreams. According to the latter, there 
would be no dreaming at all if the mind were not being constantly wakened 
by external and internal sensory stimuli. But in Robert’s view the impulsion 
to dreaming arises in the mind itself — in the fact of its becoming over- 
loaded and requiring relief; and he concludes with perfect logic that causes 
derived from somatic conditions play a subordinate part as determinants of 
dreams, and that such causes would be quite incapable of provoking dreams 
in a mind in which there was no material for the construction of dreams 
derived from waking consciousness. The only qualification he makes is to 
admit that the phantasy-images arising in dreams out of the depths of the 
mind may be affected by nervous stimuli. (Ibid., 48.) After all, therefore, 
Robert does not regard dreams as so completely dependent upon somatic 
events. Nevertheless, in his view dreams are not psychical processes, they 
have no place among the psychical processes of waking life; they are somatic 
processes occurring every night in the apparatus that is concerned with 
mental activity, and they have as their function the task of protecting that 
apparatus from excessive tension — or, to change the metaphor — of acting 
as scavengers of the mind. 1 


1 [Robert’s theory is further discussed on pp. 200 f. and 577. — In the course of a 
footnote to Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and Freud, 1895), quoted in the Editor’s 
Introduction, p. xiii £, Freud accepted this theory of Robert’s as describing one 
of the two main factors in the production of dreams.] 




G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function 107 


Another writer, Yves Delage, bases his theory on the same features of 
dreams, as revealed in the choice of their material; and it is instructive to 
notice the way in which a slight variation in his view of the same things 
leads him to conclusions of a very different bearing. 

Delage (1891, 41) tells us that he experienced in his own person, on the 
occasion of the death of someone of whom he was fond, the fact that we do 
not dream of what has occupied all our thoughts during the day, or not un- 
til it has begun to give place to other daytime concerns. His investigations 
among other people confirmed him in the general truth of this fact. He 
makes what would be an interesting observation of this kind, if it should 
prove to have general validity, on the dreams of young married couples: ‘S’ils 
ont ete fortement epris, presque jamais ils n’ont reve fun de l’autre avant le 
mariage ou pendant la lune de miel; et s’ils ont reve d’amour c’est pour etre 
infideles avec quelque personne indifferente ou odieuse.’ 1 [Ibid., 41.] What, 
then, do we dream of? Delage identifies the material that occurs in our 
dreams as consisting of fragments and residues of the preceding days and of 
earlier times. Everything that appears in our dreams, even though we are in- 
clined at first to regard it as a creation of our dream-life, turns out, when we 
have examined it more closely, to be unrecognized reproduction [of material 
already experienced] — ‘souvenir inconscient.’ 2 But this ideational material 
possesses a common characteristic: it originates from impressions which 
probably affected our senses more strongly than our intelligence or from 
which our attention was diverted very soon after they emerged. The less 
conscious and at the same time the more powerful an impression has been, 
the more chance it has of playing a part in the next dream. 

Here we have what are essentially the same two categories of impres- 
sions as are stressed by Robert: the trivial ones and those that have not 
been dealt with. Delage, however, gives the situation a different turn, for 
he holds that it is because these impressions have not been dealt with that 
they are capable of producing dreams, not because they are trivial. It is true 
in a certain sense that trivial impressions, too, have not been dealt with 
completely; being in the nature of fresh impressions, they are ‘autant de 
ressorts tendus’ 3 which are released during sleep. A powerful impression 


1 [‘If they were deeply in love, they almost never dreamt of each other before mar- 
riage or during their honeymoon; and if they had erotic dreams they were un- 
faithful in them with some indifferent or repellent person.’] 

2 [‘Unconscious memory.’] 

3 [‘They are so many springs under tension.’] 




108 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


which happens to have met with some check in the process of being 
worked over or which has been purposely held under restraint has more 
claim to play a part in dreams than an impression which is weak and al- 
most unnoticed. The psychical energy which has been stored up during 
the daytime by being inhibited and suppressed becomes the motive force 
for dreams at night. Psychical material that has been suppressed comes to 
light in dreams. [Ibid., 1 89 1 , 43 .] 1 

At this point, unluckily, Delage interrupts his train of thought. He can 
attribute only the smallest share in dreams to any independent psychical 
activity; and thus he brings his theory into line with the ruling theory of 
the partial awakening of the brain: ‘En somme le reve est le produit de la 
pensee errante, sans but et sans direction, se fixant successivement sur les 
souvenirs, qui ont garde assez d’intensite pour se placer sur sa route et 
1’arreter au passage, etablissant entre eux un lien tantot faible et indecis, 
tantot plus fort et plus serre, selon que Pactivite actuelle du cerveau est 
plus ou moins abolie par le sommeil.’ [Ibid., 46. ] 2 

(3) We may place in a third group those theories which ascribe to the 
dreaming mind a capacity and inclination for carrying out special psychi- 
cal activities of which it is largely or totally incapable in waking life. The 
putting of these faculties into force usually provides dreaming with a util- 
itarian function. Most of the estimates formed of dreaming by earlier 
writers on psychology fall into this class. It will be enough, however, for 
me to quote a sentence from Burdach (1838, 512). Dreaming, he writes, 
‘is a natural activity of the mind which is not limited by the power of in- 
dividuality, which is not interrupted by self-consciousness and which is 


1 [Footnote added 1909:] Anatole France expresses exactly the same idea in Le lys 
rouge: ‘Ce que nous voyons la nuit, ce sont les restes malheureux de ce que nous 
avons neglige dans la veille. Le reve est souvent la revanche des choses qu’on 
meprise ou le reproche des etres abandonnes.’ [‘What we see during the night 
are the miserable remnants of what we have neglected during the previous day. 
A dream is often a retaliation on the part of what we despise or a reproach on 
the part of those we have deserted.’] 

1 [‘In short, dreams are the product of thought wandering without purpose or di- 
rection, attaching itself in turn to memories which have retained enough inten- 
sity to stand in its way and interrupt its course, and linking them together by a 
bond which is sometimes weak and vague and sometimes stronger and closer, 
according as the brain’s activity at the moment is abolished by sleep to a greater 
or less extent.’] 




G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function 109 


not directed by self-determination, but which is the freely operating vi- 
tality of the sensory centres.’ 

This revelling of the mind in the free use of its own forces is evidently 
regarded by Burdach and the rest as a condition in which the mind is re- 
freshed and collects new strength for the day’s work — in which, in fact, 
it enjoys a sort of holiday. Thus Burdach [ibid., 514] quotes with ap- 
proval the charming words in which the poet Novalis praises the reign of 
dreams: ‘Dreams are a shield against the humdrum monotony of life; 
they set imagination free from its chains so that it may throw into confu- 
sion all the pictures of everyday existence and break into the unceasing 
gravity of grown men with the joyful play of a child. Without dreams we 
should surely grow sooner old; so we may look on them — not, perhaps as 
a gift from on high — but as a precious recreation, as friendly companions 
on our pilgrimage to the grave.’ [ Heinrich von Ofierdingen (1802), Part I, 
Chap. 1.] 

The reviving and healing function of dreams is described with still 
more insistence by Purkinje (1846, 456): ‘These functions are performed 
especially by productive dreams. They are the easy play of the imagination 
and have no connection with the affairs of daytime. The mind has no wish 
to prolong the tensions of waking life; it seeks to relax them and to recover 
from them. It produces above all conditions contrary to the waking ones. 
It cures sorrow by joy, cares by hopes and pictures of happy distraction, ha- 
tred by love and friendliness, fear by courage and foresight; it allays doubt 
by conviction and Hrm faith, and vain expectation by fulfilment. Many of 
the spirit’s wounds which are being constantly re-opened during the day 
are healed by sleep, which covers them and shields them from fresh injury. 
The healing action of time is based partly on this.’ We all have a feeling 
that sleep has a beneficial effect upon mental activities, and the obscure 
working of the popular mind refuses to let itself be robbed of its belief that 
dreaming is one of the ways in which sleep dispenses its benefits. 

The most original and far-reaching attempt to explain dreaming as a 
special activity of the mind, capable of free expansion only during the state 
of sleep, was that undertaken by Schemer in 1861. His book is written in 
a turgid and high-flown style and is inspired by an almost intoxicated en- 
thusiasm for his subject which is bound to repel anyone who cannot share 
in his fervour. It puts such difficulties in the way of an analysis of its con- 
tents that we turn with relief to the clearer and briefer exposition of 
Schemer’s doctrines given by the philosopher Volkelt. ‘Suggestive gleams 



110 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


of meaning proceed like lightning-flashes out of these mystical agglomer- 
ations, these clouds of glory and splendour — but they do not illuminate a 
philosopher’s path.’ It is in these terms that Schemer’s writings are judged 
even by his disciple. [Volkelt, 1875, 29.] 

Schemer is not one of those who believe that the capacities of the mind 
continue undiminished in dream-life. He himself [in Volkelt’s words 
(ibid., 30)] shows how the centralized core of the ego — its spontaneous 
energy — is deprived of its nervous force in dreams, how as a result of this 
decentralization the processes of cognition, feeling, willing and ideation 
are modified, and how the remnants of these psychical functions no longer 
possess a truly mental character but become nothing more than mecha- 
nisms. But by way of contrast, the mental activity which may be described 
as ‘imagination,’ liberated from the domination of reason and from any 
moderating control, leaps into a position of unlimited sovereignty. 
Though dream-imagination makes use of recent waking memories for its 
building material, it erects them into structures bearing not the remotest 
resemblance to those of waking life; it reveals itself in dreams as possessing 
not merely reproductive but productive powers. [Ibid., 31.] Its characteris- 
tics are what lend their peculiar features to dreams. It shows a preference 
for what is immoderate, exaggerated and monstrous. But at the same time, 
being freed from the hindrances of the categories of thought, it gains in 
pliancy, agility and versatility. It is susceptible in the subtlest manner to the 
shades of the tender feelings and to passionate emotions, and promptly in- 
corporates our inner life into external plastic pictures. Imagination in 
dreams is without the power of conceptual speech. It is obliged to paint 
what it has to say pictorially, and, since there are no concepts to exercise 
an attenuating influence, it makes full and powerful use of the pictorial 
form. Thus, however clear its speech may be, it is diffuse, clumsy and awk- 
ward. The clarity of its speech suffers particularly from the fact that it has 
a dislike of representing an object by its proper image, and prefers some 
extraneous image which will express only that particular one of the object’s 
attributes which it is seeking to represent. Here we have the ‘symbolizing 
activity’ of the imagination. . . . [Ibid., 32.] Another very important point 
is that dream-imagination never depicts things completely, but only in 
outline and even so only in the roughest fashion. For this reason its paint- 
ings seem like inspired sketches. It does not halt, however, at the mere rep- 
resentation of an object; it is under an internal necessity to involve the 
dream-ego to a greater or less extent with the object and thus produce an 
event. For instance, a dream caused by a visual stimulus may represent gold 



G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function 111 


coins in the street; the dreamer will pick them up delightedly and carry 
them off. [Ibid., 33.] 

The material with which dream-imagination accomplishes its artistic 
work is principally, according to Schemer, provided by the organic somatic 
stimuli which are so obscure during the daytime. (See above, pp. 65 ff.) 
Thus the excessively fantastic hypothesis put forward by Schemer and the 
perhaps unduly sober doctrines of Wundt and other physiologists, which 
are poles asunder in other respects, are entirely at one in regard to their 
theory of the sources and instigators of dreams. According to the physio- 
logical view, however, the mental reaction to the internal somatic stimuli 
is exhausted with the provoking of certain ideas appropriate to the stimuli; 
these ideas give rise to others along associative lines and at this point the 
course of psychical events in dreams seems to be at an end. According to 
Schemer, on the other hand, the somatic stimuli do no more than provide 
the mind with material of which it can make use for its imaginative pur- 
poses. The formation of dreams only begins, in Schemer’s eyes, at the 
point which the other writers regard as its end. 

What dream-imagination does to the somatic stimuli cannot, of course, 
be regarded as serving any useful purpose. It plays about with them, and 
pictures the organic sources, from which the stimuli of the dream in ques- 
tion have arisen, in some kind of plastic symbolism. Schemer is of the 
opinion — though here Volkelt [1875, 37] and others refuse to follow 
him — that dream-imagination has one particular favourite way of repre- 
senting the organism as a whole: namely as a house. Fortunately, however, 
it does not seem to be restricted to this one method of representation. On 
the other hand, it may make use of a whole row of houses to indicate a sin- 
gle organ; for instance, a very long street of houses may represent a stimu- 
lus from the intestines. Again, separate portions of a house may stand for 
separate portions of the body; thus, in a dream caused by a headache, the 
head may be represented by the ceiling of a room covered with disgusting, 
toad-like spiders. [Ibid., 33 £] 

Leaving this house-symbolism on one side, any number of other kinds 
of things may be used to represent the parts of the body from which the 
stimulus to the dream has arisen. ‘Thus the breathing lung will be sym- 
bolically represented by a blazing furnace, with flames roaring with a 
sound like the passage of air; the heart will be represented by hollow 
boxes or baskets, the bladder by round, bag-shaped objects or, more gen- 
erally, by hollow ones. A dream caused by stimuli arising from the male 
sexual organs may cause the dreamer to find the top part of a clarinet in 



112 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


the street or the mouth-piece of a tobacco-pipe, or again, a piece of fur. 
Here the clarinet and the tobacco-pipe represent the approximate shape 
of the male organ, while the fur stands for the pubic hair. In the case of a 
sexual dream in a woman, the narrow space where the thighs come to- 
gether may be represented by a narrow courtyard surrounded by houses, 
while the vagina may be symbolized by a soft, slippery and very narrow 
foot-path leading across the yard, along which the dreamer has to pass, in 
order, perhaps, to take a gentleman a letter.’ (Ibid., 34.) It is of special im- 
portance that, at the end of dreams with a somatic stimulus, such as 
these, the dream-imagination often throws aside its veil, as it were, by 
openly revealing the organ concerned or its function. Thus a dream ‘with 
a dental stimulus’ usually ends by the dreamer picturing himself pulling 
a tooth out of his mouth. [Ibid., 35.] 

Dream-imagination may, however, not merely direct its attention to the 
form of the stimulating organ; it may equally well symbolize the substance 
contained in that organ. In this way, a dream with an intestinal stimulus 
may lead the dreamer along muddy streets, or one with a urinary stimulus 
may lead him to a foaming stream. Or the stimulus as such, the nature of 
the excitement it produces, or the object it desires, may be symbolically 
represented. Or the dream-ego may enter into concrete relations with the 
symbols of its own state; for instance, in the case of painful stimuli the 
dreamer may engage in a desperate struggle with fierce dogs or savage 
bulls, or a woman in a sexual dream may find herself pursued by a naked 
man. [Ibid., 35 £] Quite apart from the wealth of the means that it em- 
ploys, the symbolizing activity of the imagination remains the central force 
in every dream. [Ibid., 36.] The task of penetrating more deeply into the 
nature of this imagination and of finding a place for it in a system of philo- 
sophical thought is attempted by Volkelt in the pages of his book. But, 
though it is well and feelingly written, it remains excessively hard to un- 
derstand for anyone whose early education has not prepared him for a 
sympathetic grasp of the conceptual constructions of philosophy. 

There is no utilitarian function attached to Schemer’s symbolizing 
imagination. The mind plays in its sleep with the stimuli that impinge 
upon it. One might almost suspect that it plays with them mischievously. 
But I might also be asked whether my detailed examination of Schemer’s 
theory of dreams can serve any utilitarian purpose, since its arbitrary 
character and its disobedience to all the rules of research seem only too 
obvious. By way of rejoinder, I might register a protest against the arro- 
gance which would dismiss Schemer’s theory unexamined. His theory is 



H. Dreams and Mental Diseases 


113 


built upon the impression made by his dreams upon a man who consid- 
ered them with the greatest attention and seems to have had a great per- 
sonal gift for investigating the obscure things of the mind. Moreover it 
deals with a subject that for thousands of years has been regarded by 
mankind as enigmatic, no doubt, but also as important in itself and its 
implications — a subject to the elucidation of which exact science, on its 
own admission, has contributed little apart from an attempt (in direct op- 
position to popular feeling) to deny it any meaning or significance. And 
finally it may honestly be said that in attempting to explain dreams it is 
not easy to avoid being fantastic. Ganglion cells can be fantastic too. The 
passage which I quoted on p. 104 from a sober and exact investigator like 
Binz, and which describes the way in which the dawn of awakening steals 
over the mass of sleeping cells in the cerebral cortex, is no less fantastic — 
and no less improbable — than Schemer’s attempts at interpretation. 1 
hope to be able to show that behind the latter there is an element of real- 
ity, though it has only been vaguely perceived and lacks the attribute of 
universality which should characterize a theory of dreams. Meanwhile the 
contrast between Schemer’s theory and the medical one will show us the 
extremes between which explanations of dream-life doubtfully oscillate to 
this very day. 1 


(H) 

THE RELATIONS BETWEEN 
DREAMS AND MENTAL DISEASES 

When we speak of the relation of dreams to mental disorders we may 
have three things in mind: (1) aetiological and clinical connections, as 
when a dream represents a psychotic state, or introduces it, or is left over 
from it; (2) modifications to which dream-life is subject in cases of mental 
disease; and (3) intrinsic connections between dreams and psychoses, 
analogies pointing to their being essentially akin. These numerous rela- 
tions between the two groups of phenomena were a favourite topic among 
medical writers in earlier times and have become so once again today, as is 


1 [Schemer’s theories are further discussed on pp. 245 ff. and 360.] 



114 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


shown by the bibliographies of the subject collected by Spitta [1882, 196 
f. and 319 £], Radestock [1879, 217], Maury [1878, 124 £] and Tissie 
[1898, 77 £]. Quite recently Sante de Sanctis has turned his attention to 
this subject. 1 It will be enough for the purpose of my thesis if I do no more 
than touch upon this important question. 

As regards the clinical and aetiological connections between dreams 
and psychoses, the following observations may be given as samples. Hohn- 
baum [1830, 124], quoted by Krauss [1858, 619], reports that a first out- 
break of delusional insanity often originates in an anxious or terrifying 
dream, and that the dominant idea is connected with the dream. Sante de 
Sanctis brings forward similar observations in cases of paranoia and de- 
clares that in some of these the dream was the ‘vraie cause determinante 
de la folie.’ 2 The psychosis, says de Sanctis, may come to life at a single 
blow with the appearance of the operative dream which brings the delu- 
sional material to light; or it may develop slowly in a series of further 
dreams, which have still to overcome a certain amount of doubt. In one of 
his cases the significant dream was followed by mild hysterical attacks and 
later by a condition of anxious melancholia. Fere [1886] (quoted by Tissie, 
1898 [78]) reports a dream which resulted in a hysterical paralysis. In these 
instances the dreams are represented as the aetiology of the mental disor- 
der; but we should be doing equal justice to the facts if we said that the 
mental disorder made its first appearance in dream-life, that it first broke 
through in a dream. In some further examples the pathological symptoms 
are contained in dream-life, or the psychosis is limited to dream-life. Thus 
Thomayer (1897) draws attention to certain anxiety-dreams which he 
thinks should be regarded as equivalents of epileptic fits. Allison [1868] 
(quoted by Radestock, 1879 [225]) has described a ‘nocturnal insanity,’ in 
which the patient appears completely healthy during the day but is regu- 
larly subject at night to hallucinations, fits of frenzy, etc. Similar observa- 
tions are reported by de Sanctis [1899, 226] (a dream in an alcoholic 
patient which was equivalent to a paranoia, and which represented voices 
accusing his wife of unfaithfulness) and Tissie. The latter (1898, [147 ££]) 
gives copious recent examples in which acts of a pathological nature, such 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] Among later writers who deal with these relations are 
Fere [1887], Ideler [1862], Lasegue [1881], Pichon [1896], Regis [1894], Vespa 
[1897], Giessler [1888, etc.], Kazowsky [1901], Pachantoni [1909], etc. 

2 [‘The true determining cause of insanity.’] 




H. Dreams and Mental Diseases 


115 


as conduct based on delusional premises and obsessive impulses, were de- 
rived from dreams. Guislain [1833] describes a case in which sleep was re- 
placed by an intermittent insanity. 

There can be no doubt that alongside of the psychology of dreams 
physicians will some day have to turn their attention to a psychopathology 
of dreams. 

In cases of recovery from mental diseases it can often be quite clearly 
observed that, while functioning is normal during the day, dream-life is 
still under the influence of the psychosis. According to Krauss (1859, 
270), Gregory first drew attention to this fact. Macario [1847], quoted 
by Tissie [1898, 89], describes how a manic patient, a week after his com- 
plete recovery, was still subject in his dreams to the flight of ideas and the 
violent passions which were characteristic of his illness. 

Very little research has hitherto been carried out into the modifications 
occurring in dream-life during chronic psychoses. 1 On the other hand, at- 
tention was long ago directed to the underlying kinship between dreams 
and mental disorders, exhibited in the wide measure of agreement between 
their manifestations. Maury (1854, 124) tells us that Cabanis (1802) was 
the first to remark on them, and after him Lelut [1852], J. Moreau (1855) 
and, in particular, Maine de Biran [1834, 111 f£] the philosopher. No 
doubt the comparison goes back still earlier. Radestock (1879, 217) intro- 
duces the chapter in which he deals with it by a number of quotations 
drawing an analogy between dreams and madness. Kant writes somewhere 
[1764]: ‘The madman is a waking dreamer.’ Krauss (1859, 270) declares 
that ‘insanity is a dream dreamt while the senses are awake.’ Schopenhauer 
[1862, 1, 246] calls dreams a brief madness and madness a long dream. Ha- 
gen [1846, 812] describes delirium as dream-life induced not by sleep but 
by illness. Wundt [1878, 662] writes: ‘We ourselves, in fact, can experience 
in dreams almost all the phenomena to be met with in insane asylums.’ 

Spitta (1882, 199), in much the same way as Maury (1854), enumer- 
ates as follows the different points of agreement which constitute the basis 
for this comparison: ‘(1) Self-consciousness is suspended or at least re- 
tarded, which results in a lack of insight into the nature of the condition, 
with consequent inability to feel surprise and loss of moral consciousness. 
(2) Perception by the sense organs is modified: being diminished in 


1 [This question was later examined by Freud himself (1922b, end of Section B).] 



116 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


dreams but as a rule greatly increased in insanity. (3) Inter-connection of 
ideas occurs exclusively according to the laws of association and reproduc- 
tion; ideas thus fall into sequences automatically and there is a conse- 
quent lack of proportion in the relation between ideas (exaggerations and 
illusions). All this leads to (4) an alteration or in some cases a reversal of 
personality and occasionally of character traits (perverse conduct).’ 

Radestock (1879, 219) adds a few more features — analogies between 
the material in the two cases: ‘The majority of hallucinations and illusions 
occur in the region of the senses of sight and hearing and of coenaesthe- 
sia. As in the case of dreams, the senses of smell and taste provide the 
fewest elements. — Both in patients suffering from fever and in dreamers 
memories arise from the remote past; both sleeping and sick men recol- 
lect things which waking and healthy men seem to have forgotten.’ The 
analogy between dreams and psychoses is only fully appreciated when it 
is seen to extend to the details of expressive movement and to particular 
characteristics of facial expression. 

‘A man tormented by physical and mental suffering obtains from 
dreams what reality denies him: health and happiness. So too in mental 
disease there are bright pictures of happiness, grandeur, eminence and 
wealth. The supposed possession of property and the imaginary fulfil- 
ment of wishes — the withholding or destruction of which actually affords 
a psychological basis for insanity — often constitute the chief content of 
a delirium. A woman who has lost a loved child experiences the joys of 
motherhood in her delirium; a man who has lost his money believes him- 
self immensely rich; a girl who has been deceived feels that she is tenderly 
loved.’ 

(This passage from Radestock is actually a summary of an acute obser- 
vation made by Griesinger (1861, 106), who shows quite clearly that 
ideas in dreams and in psychoses have in common the characteristic of 
being fulfilments ofivishes. My own researches have taught me that in this 
fact lies the key to a psychological theory of both dreams and psychoses.) 

‘The chief feature of dreams and of insanity lies in their eccentric trains 
of thought and their weakness of judgement.’ In both states [Radestock 
continues] we find an over-valuation of the subject’s own mental achieve- 
ments which seems senseless to a sober view; the rapid sequence of ideas 
in dreams is paralleled by the flight of ideas in psychoses. In both there is 
a complete lack of sense of time. In dreams the personality may be split — 
when, for instance, the dreamer’s own knowledge is divided between two 
persons and when, in the dream, the extraneous ego corrects the actual 



H. Dreams and Mental Diseases 


117 


one. This is precisely on a par with the splitting of the personality that is 
familiar to us in hallucinatory paranoia; the dreamer too hears his own 
thoughts pronounced by extraneous voices. Even chronic delusional ideas 
have their analogy in stereotyped recurrent pathological dreams ( le reve 
obsedant ). — It not infrequently happens that after recovering from a delir- 
ium patients will say that the whole period of their illness seems to them 
like a not unpleasant dream: indeed they will sometimes tell us that even 
during the illness they have occasionally had a feeling that they are only 
caught up in a dream — as is often the case in dreams occurring in sleep. 

After all this, it is not surprising that Radestock sums up his views, and 
those of many others, by declaring that ‘insanity, an abnormal patholog- 
ical phenomenon, is to be regarded as an intensification of the periodi- 
cally recurrent normal condition of dreaming.’ (Ibid., 228.) 

Krauss (1859, 270 f.) has sought to establish what is perhaps a still more 
intimate connection between dreams and insanity than can be demon- 
strated by an analogy between these external manifestations. This connec- 
tion he sees in their aetiology or rather in the sources of their excitation. 
The fundamental element common to the two states lies according to him, 
as we have seen [pp. 70 £], in organically determined sensations, in sensa- 
tions derived from somatic stimuli, in the coenaesthesia which is based 
upon contributions arising from all the organs. (Cf. Peisse, 1857, 2, 21, 
quoted by Maury, 1878, 52.) 

The indisputable analogy between dreams and insanity, extending as 
it does down to their characteristic details, is one of the most powerful 
props of the medical theory of dream-life, which regards dreaming as a 
useless and disturbing process and as the expression of a reduced activity 
of the mind. Nevertheless it is not to be expected that we shall find the 
ultimate explanation of dreams in the direction of mental disorders; for 
the unsatisfactory state of our knowledge of the origin of these latter con- 
ditions is generally recognized. It is quite likely, on the contrary, that a 
modification of our attitude towards dreams will at the same time affect 
our views upon the internal mechanism of mental disorders and that we 
shall be working towards an explanation of the psychoses while we are en- 
deavouring to throw some light on the mystery of dreams. 1 


[A discussion of the relation between dreams and psychoses will be found in Lec- 
ture 29 of the Neiv Introductory Lectures (Freud, 1933a).] 




118 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


POSTSCRIPT, 1909 

The fact that I have not extended my account of the literature dealing 
with the problems of dreams to cover the period between the first and sec- 
ond editions of this book stands in need of a justification. It may strike the 
reader as an unsatisfactory one, but for me it was none the less decisive. 
The motives which led me to give any account at all of the way in which 
earlier writers have dealt with dreams were exhausted with the completion 
of this introductory chapter; to continue the task would have cost me an 
extraordinary effort — and the result would have been of very little use or 
instruction. For the intervening nine years have produced nothing new or 
valuable either in factual material or in opinions that might throw light on 
the subject. In the majority of publications that have appeared during the 
interval my work has remained unmentioned and unconsidered. It has, of 
course, received least attention from those who are engaged in what is de- 
scribed as ‘research’ into dreams, and who have thus provided a shining ex- 
ample of the repugnance to learning anything new which is characteristic 
of men of science. In the ironical words of Anatole France, 7 es savants ne 
sont pas curieux .’ If there were such a thing in science as a right to retaliate, 
I should certainly be justified in my turn in disregarding the literature that 
has been issued since the publication of this book. The few notices of it 
that have appeared in scientific periodicals show so much lack of under- 
standing and so much iwhunderstanding that my only reply to the critics 
would be to suggest their reading the book again — or perhaps, indeed, 
merely to suggest their reading it. 

A large number of dreams have been published and analysed in accor- 
dance with my directions in papers by physicians who have decided to 
adopt the psycho-analytic therapeutic procedure, as well as by other au- 
thors. 1 In so far as these writings have gone beyond a mere confirmation 
of my views I have included their findings in the course of my exposition. 
I have added a second bibliography at the end of the volume containing 


1 [In the 1909 and 1911 editions only, there was a parenthesis at this point con- 
taining the names of Jung, Abraham, Riklin, Muthmann and Stekel. In 1909 
only, the next sentence read: ‘But these publications have merely confirmed my 
views and not added anything to them.’] 




Postscript, 1909 


119 


a list of the most important works that have appeared since this book was 
first published. 1 The extensive monograph on dreams by Same de Sanctis 
(1899), of which a German translation appeared soon after its issue, was 
published almost simultaneously with my Interpretation of Dreams, so 
that neither I nor the Italian author was able to comment upon each 
other’s work. I have unfortunately been unable to escape the conclusion 
that his painstaking volume is totally deficient in ideas — so much so, in 
fact, that it would not even lead one to suspect the existence of the prob- 
lems with which I have dealt. 

Only two publications require to be mentioned which come near to 
my own treatment of the problems of dreams. Hermann Swoboda 
(1904), a youthful philosopher, has undertaken the task of extending to 
psychical events the discovery of a biological periodicity (in 23-day and 
28-day periods) made by Wilhelm Fliess [1906]. 2 In the course of his 
highly imaginative work he has endeavoured to use this key for the solu- 
tion, among other problems, of the riddle of dreams. His findings would 
seem to underestimate the significance of dreams; the subject-matter of a 
dream, on his view, is to be explained as an assemblage of all the memo- 
ries which, on the night on which it is dreamt, complete one of the bio- 
logical periods, whether for the first or for the «th time. A personal 
communication from the author led me at first to suppose that he himself 
no longer took this theory seriously, but it seems that this was a mistaken 
conclusion on my part. 3 At a later stage [see below, pp. 190 ff.] I shall re- 
port upon some observations which I made in connection with Swo- 
boda’s suggestion but which led me to no convincing conclusion. I was 
the more pleased when, in an unexpected quarter, 1 made the chance dis- 
covery of a view of dreams which coincides entirely with the core of my 
own theory. It is impossible, for chronological reasons, that the statement 
in question can have been influenced by my book. I must therefore hail 
it as the single discoverable instance in the literature of the subject of an 


1 [See the Editor’s Introduction, pp. xii f. and xx.] 

2 [An account of Fliess’s theories and of his relations with Swoboda is given in Sec- 
tion IV of Kris’s introduction to Freud’s correspondence with Fliess (Freud, 
1950/?).] 

3 [In its present form this sentence dates from 1911. In 1909 it read: ‘A personal 
communication from the author to the effect that he himself no longer supports 
these views exempts me from giving them serious consideration.’ The following 
sentence was added in 1911.] 



120 


I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams 


independent thinker who is in agreement with the essence of my theory 
of dreams. The book which contains the passage upon dreaming which I 
have in mind appeared in its second edition in 1900 under the title of 
Phantasien eines Realisten by ‘Lynkeus.’ [First edition, 1 899.] 1 


POSTSCRIPT, 1914 

The preceding plea of justification was written in 1909. I am bound 
to admit that since then the situation has changed; my contribution to 
the interpretation of dreams is no longer neglected by writers on the sub- 
ject. The new state of affairs, however, has now made it quite out of the 
question for me to extend my previous account of the literature. The In- 
terpretation of Dreams has raised a whole series of fresh considerations and 
problems which have been discussed in a great variety of ways. 1 cannot 
give an account of these works, however, before I have expounded those 
views of my own on which they are based. I have therefore dealt with 
whatever seems to me of value in the latest literature at its appropriate 
place in the course of the discussion which now follows. 


1 [Footnote added 1930:] Cf: my paper on Josef Popper- Lynkeus and the theory of 
dreams (1923 f.). [Freud wrote a further paper on the subject (1932c). The pas- 
sage referred to in the text above will be found quoted in full below in a footnote 
on p. 325 £] 




CHAPTER II 


THE METHOD OF INTERPRETING DREAMS: 
AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN DREAM 


The title that I have chosen for my work makes plain which of the tradi- 
tional approaches to the problem of dreams I am inclined to follow. The 
aim which I have set before myself is to show that dreams are capable of 
being interpreted; and any contributions I may be able to make towards 
the solution of the problems dealt with in the last chapter will only arise 
as by-products in the course of carrying out my proper task. My pre- 
sumption that dreams can be interpreted at once puts me in opposition 
to the ruling theory of dreams and in fact to every theory of dreams with 
the single exception of Schemer’s [pp. 109 ff.]; for ‘interpreting’ a dream 
implies assigning a ‘meaning’ to it — that is, replacing it by something 
which fits into the chain of our mental acts as a link having a validity and 
importance equal to the rest. As we have seen, the scientific theories of 
dreams leave no room for any problem of interpreting them, since in their 
view a dream is not a mental act at all, but a somatic process signalizing 
its occurrence by indications registered in the mental apparatus. Lay 
opinion has taken a different attitude throughout the ages. It has exer- 
cised its indefeasible right to behave inconsistently; and, though admit- 
ting that dreams are unintelligible and absurd, it cannot bring itself to 
declare that they have no significance at all. Led by some obscure feeling, 
it seems to assume that, in spite of everything, every dream has a mean- 
ing, though a hidden one, that dreams are designed to take the place of 
some other process of thought, and that we have only to undo the substi- 
tution correctly in order to arrive at this hidden meaning. 


121 



122 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


Thus the lay world has from the earliest times concerned itself with 
‘interpreting’ dreams and in its attempts to do so it has made use of two 
essentially different methods. 

The first of these procedures considers the content of the dream as a 
whole and seeks to replace it by another content which is intelligible and 
in certain respects analogous to the original one. This is ‘ symbolic dream- 
interpreting; and it inevitably breaks down when faced by dreams which 
are not merely unintelligible but also confused. An example of this pro- 
cedure is to be seen in the explanation of Pharaoh’s dream propounded 
by Joseph in the Bible. The seven fat kine followed by seven lean kine 
that ate up the fat kine — all this was a symbolic substitute for a prophecy 
of seven years of famine in the land of Egypt which should consume all 
that was brought forth in the seven years of plenty. Most of the artificial 
dreams constructed by imaginative writers are designed for a symbolic in- 
terpretation of this sort: they reproduce the writer’s thoughts under a dis- 
guise which is regarded as harmonizing with the recognized characteristics 
of dreams . 1 The idea of dreams being chiefly concerned with the future 
and being able to foretell it — a remnant of the old prophetic significance 
of dreams — provides a reason for transposing the meaning of the dream, 
when it has been arrived at by symbolic interpretation, into the future 
tense. It is of course impossible to give instructions upon the method of 
arriving at a symbolic interpretation. Success must be a question of hit- 
ting on a clever idea, of direct intuition, and for that reason it was possi- 
ble for dream-interpretation by means of symbolism to be exalted into an 
artistic activity dependent on the possession of peculiar gifts . 2 


1 [Footnote added 1909:] I found by chance in Gradiva, a story written by Wil- 
helm Jensen, a number of artificial dreams which were perfectly correctly con- 
structed and could be interpreted just as though they had not been invented but 
had been dreamt by real people. In reply to an enquiry, the author confirmed the 
fact that he had no knowledge of my theory of dreams. I have argued that the 
agreement between my researches and this writer’s creations is evidence in favour 
of the correctness of my analysis of dreams. (See Freud, 1907<z.) 

1 [Footnote added 1914:] Aristotle [De divinatione per somnnm, II (Trans., 1935, 
383)] remarked in this connection that the best interpreter of dreams was the 
man who could best grasp similarities; for dream-pictures, like pictures on water, 
are pulled out of shape by movement, and the most successful interpreter is the 
man who can detect the truth from the misshapen picture. (Buchsenschutz, 
1868, 65.) 



II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


123 


The second of the two popular methods of interpreting dreams is far 
from making any such claims. It might be described as the ‘decoding 
method, since it treats dreams as a kind of cryptography in which each 
sign can be translated into another sign having a known meaning, in ac- 
cordance with a fixed key. Suppose, for instance, that 1 have dreamt of a 
letter and also of a funeral. If I consult a ‘dream-book,’ I find that ‘letter’ 
must be translated by ‘trouble’ and ‘funeral’ by ‘betrothal.’ It then re- 
mains for me to link together the keywords which I have deciphered in 
this way and, once more, to transpose the result into the future tense. An 
interesting modification of the process of decoding, which to some extent 
corrects the purely mechanical character of its method of transposing, is 
to be found in the book written upon the interpretation of dreams 
[ Oneirocritica ] by Artemidorus of Daldis. 1 This method takes into ac- 
count not only the content of the dream but also the character and cir- 
cumstances of the dreamer; so that the same dream-element will have a 


1 [Footnote added 1914:] Artemidorus of Daldis, who was probably born at the be- 
ginning of the second century A.D., has left us the most complete and painstak- 
ing study of dream-interpretation as practised in the Graeco-Roman world. As 
Theodor Gomperz (1866, 7 f.) points out, he insisted on the importance of bas- 
ing the interpretation of dreams on observation and experience, and made a 
rigid distinction between his own art and others that were illusory. The principle 
of his interpretative art, according to Gomperz, is identical with magic, the prin- 
ciple of association. A thing in a dream means what it recalls to the mind — to 
the dream-interpreter’s mind, it need hardly be said. An insuperable source of 
arbitrariness and uncertainty arises from the fact that the dream-element may re- 
call various things to the interpreter’s mind and may recall something different 
to different interpreters. The technique which I describe in the pages that follow 
differs in one essential respect from the ancient method: it imposes the task of 
interpretation upon the dreamer himself. It is not concerned with what occurs 
to the interpreter in connection with a particular element of the dream, but with 
what occurs to the dreamer . — Recent reports, however, from a missionary Father 
Tfinkdji (1913, [516-17 and 523]), show that modern dream-interpreters in the 
East also make free use of the dreamer’s collaboration. He writes as follows of 
dream-interpreters among the Arabs of Mesopotamia: ‘Pour interpreter exacte- 
ment un songe, les oniromanciens les plus habiles s’informent de ceux qui les 
consultent de toutes les circonstances qu’ils regardent necessaires pour la bonne 
explication. . . . En un mot, nos oniromanciens ne laissent aucune circonstance 
leur echapper et ne donnent [’interpretation desiree avant d’avoir parfaitement 
saisi et re^u toutes les interrogations desirables.’ [‘In order to give a precise inter- 
pretation of a dream, the most skilful dream-diviners find out from those who 



124 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


different meaning for a rich man, a married man or, let us say, an orator, 
from what it has for a poor man, a bachelor or a merchant. The essence 
of the decoding procedure, however, lies in the fact that the work of in- 
terpretation is not brought to bear on the dream as a whole but on each 
portion of the dream’s content independently, as though the dream were 
a geological conglomerate in which each fragment of rock required a sep- 
arate assessment. There can be no question that the invention of the de- 
coding method of interpretation was suggested by disconnected and 
confused dreams . 2 

It cannot be doubted for a moment that neither of the two popular pro- 
cedures for interpreting dreams can be employed for a scientific treatment 
of the subject. The symbolic method is restricted in its application and in- 
capable of being laid down on general lines. In the case of the decoding 
method everything depends on the trustworthiness of the ‘key’ — the 
dream-book, and of this we have no guarantee. Thus one might feel 


consult them all the circumstances which they consider essential in order to ar- 
rive at a right explanation. ... In short, these dream-diviners do not allow a 
single point to escape them and only give their interpretation after they have com- 
pletely mastered the replies to all the necessary enquiries.’] Among these enquiries 
are habitually included questions as to the dreamer’s closest family relations — 
his parents, wife and children — as well as such a typical formula as: ‘Habuistine 
in hac nocte copulam conjugalem ante vel post somnium?’ [‘Did you copulate 
with your wife that night before or after you had the dream?’] — ‘L’idee domi- 
nante dans [’interpretation des songes consiste a expliquer le reve par son op- 
posee.’ [‘The principal idea in interpreting dreams lies in explaining a dream by 
its opposite.’] 

2 [ Footnote added 1909:] Dr. Alfred Robitsek has pointed out to me that the ori- 
ental ‘dream-books’ (of which ours are wretched imitations) base the greater 
number of their interpretations of dream-elements upon similarity of sounds 
and resemblance between words. The fact that these connections inevitably dis- 
appear in translation accounts for the unintelligibility of the renderings in our 
own popular dream-books. The extraordinarily important part played by pun- 
ning and verbal quibbles in the ancient civilizations of the East may be studied 
in the writings of Hugo Winckler [the famous archaeologist ]. — [ Added 1911:] 
The nicest instance of a dream-interpretation which has reached us from ancient 
times is based on a play upon words. It is told by Artemidorus [Book IV, Chap. 
24, Krauss’s translation, 1881, 255]: ‘I think too that Aristander gave a most 
happy interpretation to Alexander of Macedon when he had surrounded Tyre 
[TOpog] and was besieging it but was feeling uneasy and disturbed because of 
the length of time the siege was taking. Alexander dreamt he saw a satyr 




II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


125 


tempted to agree with the philosophers and the psychiatrists and, like them, 
rule out the problem of dream-interpretation as a purely fanciful task. 2 

But I have been taught better. I have been driven to realize that here 
once more we have one of those not infrequent cases in which an ancient 
and jealously held popular belief seems to be nearer the truth than the 
judgement of the prevalent science of today. 1 must affirm that dreams 
really have a meaning and that a scientific procedure for interpreting 
them is possible. 

My knowledge of the procedure was reached in the following manner. 
I have been engaged for many years (with a therapeutic aim in view) in 
unravelling certain psycho-pathological structures — hysterical phobias, 
obsessional ideas, and so on. I have been doing so, in fact, ever since I 
learnt from an important communication by Josef Breuer that as regards 
these structures (which are looked on as pathological symptoms) unrav- 
elling them coincides with removing them. 3 (Cf. Breuer and Freud, 
1895.) If a pathological idea of this sort can be traced back to the ele- 
ments in the patient’s mental life from which it originated, it simultane- 
ously crumbles away and the patient is freed from it. Considering the 
impotence of our other therapeutic efforts and the puzzling nature of 
these disorders, I felt tempted to follow the path marked out by Breuer, 
in spite of every difficulty, till a complete explanation was reached. I shall 
have on another occasion to report at length upon the form finally taken 


[aarupog] dancing on his shield. Aristander happened to be in the neighbor- 
hood of Tyre, in attendance on the king during his Syrian campaign. By divid- 
ing the word for satyr into act and x'Opog he encouraged the king to press home 
the siege so that he became master of the city.’ (act Tf'poc; = Tyre is thine.) — 
Indeed, dreams are so closely related to linguistic expression that Ferenczi [1910] 
has truly remarked that every tongue has its own dream-language. It is impossi- 
ble as a rule to translate a dream into a foreign language and this is equally true, 
I fancy, of a book such as the present one. [ Added 1930:] Nevertheless Dr. A. A. 
Brill of New York, and others after him, have succeeded in translating The Inter- 
pretation of Dreams. 

2 After I had completed my manuscript I came across a work by Stumpf (1899) 
which agrees with my views in seeking to prove that dreams have a meaning and 
can be interpreted. He effects his interpretations, however, by means of a sym- 
bolism of an allegorical character without any guarantee of the general validity 
of his procedure. 

3 \^Auflijsung and ‘Losung in the original.] 




126 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


by this procedure and the results of my labours. It was in the course of 
these psycho-analytic studies that I came upon dream-interpretation. My 
patients were pledged to communicate to me every idea or thought that 
occurred to them in connection with some particular subject; amongst 
other things they told me their dreams and so taught me that a dream can 
be inserted into the psychical chain that has to be traced backwards in the 
memory from a pathological idea. It was then only a short step to treating 
the dream itself as a symptom and to applying to dreams the method of 
interpretation that had been worked out for symptoms. 

This involves some psychological preparation of the patient. We must 
aim at bringing about two changes in him: an increase in the attention he 
pays to his own psychical perceptions and the elimination of the criticism 
by which he normally sifts the thoughts that occur to him. In order that 
he may be able to concentrate his attention on his self-observation it is an 
advantage for him to lie in a restful attitude and shut his eyes. 1 It is nec- 
essary to insist explicitly on his renouncing all criticism of the thoughts 
that he perceives. We therefore tell him that the success of the psycho- 
analysis depends on his noticing and reporting whatever comes into his 
head and not being misled, for instance, into suppressing an idea because 
it strikes him as unimportant or irrelevant or because it seems to him 
meaningless. He must adopt a completely impartial attitude to what oc- 
curs to him, since it is precisely his critical attitude which is responsible 
for his being unable, in the ordinary course of things, to achieve the de- 
sired unravelling of his dream or obsessional idea or whatever it may be. 

I have noticed in my psycho-analytical work that the whole frame of 
mind of a man who is reflecting is totally different from that of a man who 
is observing his own psychical processes. In reflection there is one more psy- 
chical activity at work than in the most attentive self-observation, and this 
is shown amongst other things by the tense looks and wrinkled forehead of 
a person pursuing his reflections as compared with the restful expression of 
a self-observer. In both cases attention 2 must be concentrated, but the man 
who is reflecting is also exercising his critical faculty; this leads him to reject 
some of the ideas that occur to him after perceiving them, to cut short oth- 


1 [The stress upon the advisability of shutting the eyes (a remnant of the old hyp- 
notic procedure) was very soon dropped. See, for instance, the account of psy- 
cho-analytic technique in Freud (1904a), where it is specifically mentioned that 
the analyst does not ask the patient to shut his eyes.] 

1 [The function of attention is discussed below (p. 590).] 




II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


127 


ers without following the trains of thought which they would open up to 
him, and to behave in such a way towards still others that they never be- 
come conscious at all and are accordingly suppressed before being per- 
ceived. The self-observer on the other hand need only take the trouble to 
suppress his critical faculty. If he succeeds in doing that, innumerable ideas 
come into his consciousness of which he could otherwise never have 
got hold. The material which is in this way freshly obtained for his self- 
perception makes it possible to interpret both his pathological ideas and his 
dream-structures. What is in question, evidently, is the establishment of a 
psychical state which, in its distribution of psychical energy (that is, of mo- 
bile attention), bears some analogy to the state before falling asleep — and 
no doubt also to hypnosis. As we fall asleep, ‘involuntary ideas’ emerge, 
owing to the relaxation of a certain deliberate (and no doubt also critical) 
activity which we allow to influence the course of our ideas while we are 
awake. (We usually attribute this relaxation to ‘fatigue.’) As the involuntary 
ideas emerge they change into visual and acoustic images. (Cf. the remarks 
by Schleiermacher and others quoted above on pp. 78 f. [and 99 f.].) 1 In 
the state used for the analysis of dreams and pathological ideas, the patient 
purposely and deliberately abandons this activity and employs the psychical 
energy thus saved (or a portion of it) in attentively following the involun- 
tary thoughts which now emerge, and which — and here the situation dif- 
fers from that of falling asleep — retain the character of ideas. In this way the 
Involuntary ideas are transformed into ‘ voluntary ones. 

The adoption 2 of the required attitude of mind towards ideas that seem 
to emerge ‘of their own free will’ and the abandonment of the critical 
function that is normally in operation against them seem to be hard of 
achievement for some people. The ‘involuntary thoughts’ are liable to re- 
lease a most violent resistance, which seeks to prevent their emergence. If 
we may trust that great poet and philosopher Friedrich Schiller, however, 
poetic creation must demand an exactly similar attitude. In a passage in 
his correspondence with Korner — we have to thank Otto Rank for un- 
earthing it — Schiller (writing on December 1, 1788) replies to his friend’s 
complaint of insufficient productivity: ‘The ground for your complaint 


1 [Footnote added 1919:] Silberer (1909, 1910 and 1912) has made important 
contributions to dream-interpretation by directly observing this transformation 
of ideas into visual images. [See below, pp. 358 f. and 507 f.] 

2 [This paragraph was added in 1909, and the first sentence of the next paragraph 
modified accordingly.] 




128 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


seems to me to lie in the constraint imposed by your reason upon your 
imagination. I will make my idea more concrete by a simile. It seems a bad 
thing and detrimental to the creative work of the mind if Reason makes 
too close an examination of the ideas as they come pouring in — at the very 
gateway, as it were. Looked at in isolation, a thought may seem very trivial 
or very fantastic; but it may be made important by another thought that 
comes after it, and, in conjunction with other thoughts that may seem 
equally absurd, it may turn out to form a most effective link. Reason can- 
not form any opinion upon all this unless it retains the thought long 
enough to look at it in connection with the others. On the other hand, 
where there is a creative mind, Reason — so it seems to me — relaxes its 
watch upon the gates, and the ideas rush in pell-mell, and only then does 
it look them through and examine them in a mass. — You critics, or what- 
ever else you may call yourselves, are ashamed or frightened of the mo- 
mentary and transient extravagances which are to be found in all truly 
creative minds and whose longer or shorter duration distinguishes the 
thinking artist from the dreamer. You complain of your unfruitfulness be- 
cause you reject too soon and discriminate too severely.’ 

Nevertheless what Schiller describes as a relaxation of the watch upon the 
gates of Reason, the adoption of an attitude of uncritical self-observation, 
is by no means difficult. Most of my patients achieve it after their first in- 
structions. 1 myself can do so very completely, by the help of writing down 
my ideas as they occur to me. The amount of psychical energy by which it 
is possible to reduce critical activity and increase the intensity of self- 
observation varies considerably according to the subject on which one is try- 
ing to fix one’s attention. 

Our first step in the employment of this procedure teaches us that what 
we must take as the object of our attention is not the dream as a whole but 
the separate portions of its content. If I say to a patient who is still a 
novice: ‘What occurs to you in connection with this dream?’ as a rule his 
mental horizon becomes a blank. If, however, I put the dream before him 
cut up into pieces, he will give me a series of associations to each piece, 
which might be described as the ‘background thoughts’ of that particular 
part of the dream. Thus the method of dream-interpretation which I prac- 
tise already differs in this first important respect from the popular, historic 
and legendary method of interpretation by means of symbolism and ap- 
proximates to the second or ‘decoding’ method. Like the latter, it employs 
interpretation en detail and not en masse\ like the latter, it regards dreams 



II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


129 


from the very first as being of a composite character, as being conglomer- 
ates of psychical formations. [Cf. pp. 427 f. and 457.] 1 

In the course of my psycho-analyses of neurotics I must already have 
analysed over a thousand dreams; but I do not propose to make use of this 
material in my present introduction to the technique and theory of dream- 
interpretation. Apart from the fact that such a course would be open to the 
objection that these are the dreams of neuropaths, from which no valid in- 
ferences could be made as to the dreams of normal people, there is quite 
another reason which forces this decision upon me. The subject to which 
these dreams of my patients lead up is always, of course, the case history 
which underlies their neurosis. Each dream would therefore necessitate a 
lengthy introduction and an investigation of the nature and aetiological 
determinants of the psychoneuroses. But these questions are in themselves 
novelties and highly bewildering and would distract attention from the 
problem of dreams. On the contrary, it is my intention to make use of my 
present elucidation of dreams as a preliminary step towards solving the 
more difficult problems of the psychology of the neuroses. 2 If, however, I 
forego my principal material, the dreams of my neurotic patients, I must 
not be too particular about what is left to me. All that remains are such 
dreams as have been reported to me from time to time by normal persons 
of my acquaintance, and such others as have been quoted as instances in 
the literature dealing with dream-life. Unluckily, however, none of these 
dreams are accompanied by the analysis without which I cannot discover 
a dream’s meaning. My procedure is not so convenient as the popular de- 
coding method which translates any given piece of a dream’s content by a 
fixed key. I, on the contrary, am prepared to find that the same piece of 


1 [The technique of dream-interpretation is further discussed below (p. 526 f£). 
See also the first two sections of Freud (1923c). The quite other question of the 
part played by dream-interpretation in the technique of therapeutic psycho- 
analysis is considered in Freud (1911c).] 

2 [At the beginning of Section E of Chapter VII, Freud reflects upon the difficulties 
imposed upon his exposition of the subject by this programme, which is already 
laid down in his preface to the first edition (p. xxiii). As he points out on p. 170 £ 
and again on p. 175 n., he is often led into disregarding it. In spite of his declared 
intention, he makes use of many of his patients’ dreams, and more than once (e.g. 
on p. 173 f.) enters into a discussion of the mechanism of neurotic symptoms.] 




130 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


content may conceal a different meaning when it occurs in various people 
or in various contexts. Thus it comes about that I am led to my own 
dreams, which offer a copious and convenient material, derived from an 
approximately normal person and relating to multifarious occasions of 
daily life. No doubt I shall be met by doubts of the trustworthiness of ‘self- 
analyses’ of this kind; and I shall be told that they leave the door open to 
arbitrary conclusions. In my judgement the situation is in fact more 
favourable in the case of tf^-observation than in that of other people; at all 
events we may make the experiment and see how far self-analysis takes us 
with the interpretation of dreams. But 1 have other difficulties to over- 
come, which lie within myself. There is some natural hesitation about re- 
vealing so many intimate facts about one’s mental life; nor can there be 
any guarantee against misinterpretation by strangers. But it must be possi- 
ble to overcome such hesitations. ‘Tout psychologiste,’ writes Delboeuf 
[1885], ‘est oblige de faire l’aveu meme de ses faiblesses s’il croit par la jeter 
du jour sur quelque probleme obscur.’ 1 And it is safe to assume that my 
readers too will very soon find their initial interest in the indiscretions 
which I am bound to make replaced by an absorbing immersion in the 
psychological problems upon which they throw light. 2 

Accordingly I shall proceed to choose out one of my own dreams and 
demonstrate upon it my method of interpretation. In the case of every 
such dream some remarks by way of preamble will be necessary. — And 
now I must ask the reader to make my interests his own for quite a while, 
and to plunge, along with me, into the minutest details of my life; for a 
transference of this kind is peremptorily demanded by our interest in the 
hidden meaning of dreams. 


Preamble 

During the summer of 1895 I had been giving psychoanalytic treatment 
to a young lady who was on very friendly terms with me and my family. 
It will be readily understood that a mixed relationship such as this may 


1 [‘Every psychologist is under an obligation to confess even his own weaknesses, 
if he thinks that it may throw light upon some obscure problem.’] 

2 1 am obliged to add, however, by way of qualification of what I have said above, 
that in scarcely any instance have I brought forward the complete interpretation 
of one of my own dreams, as it is known to me. I have probably been wise in 
not putting too much faith in my readers’ discretion. 




II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream 


131 


be a source of many disturbed feelings in a physician and particularly in 
a psychotherapist. While the physician’s personal interest is greater, his 
authority is less; any failure would bring a threat to the old-established 
friendship with the patient’s family. This treatment had ended in a partial 
success; the patient was relieved of her hysterical anxiety but did not lose 
all her somatic symptoms. At that time I was not yet quite clear in my 
mind as to the criteria indicating that a hysterical case history was finally 
closed, and I proposed a solution to the patient which she seemed unwill- 
ing to accept. While we were thus at variance, we had broken off the 
treatment for the summer vacation. — One day I had a visit from a junior 
colleague, one of my oldest friends, who had been staying with my pa- 
tient, Irma, and her family at their country resort. 1 asked him how he 
had found her and he answered; ‘She’s better, but not quite well.’ I was 
conscious that my friend Otto’s words, or the tone in which he spoke 
them, annoyed me. I fancied I detected a reproof in them, such as to the 
effect that I had promised the patient too much; and, whether rightly or 
wrongly, I attributed the supposed fact of Otto’s siding against me to the 
influence of my patient’s relatives, who, as it seemed to me, had never 
looked with favour on the treatment. However, my disagreeable impres- 
sion was not clear to me and I gave no outward sign of it. The same eve- 
ning I wrote out Irma’s case history, with the idea of giving it to Dr. M. 
(a common friend who was at that time the leading figure in our circle) 
in order to justify myself. That night (or more probably the next morn- 
ing) I had the following dream, which I noted down immediately after 
waking. 1 


Dream of July 23rd-24th, 1895 

A large hall — numerous guests, whom we were receiving. — Among them 
was Irma. I at once took her on one side, as though to answer her letter and to 
reproach her for not having accepted my ‘solution ’yet. I said to her: ‘If you still 
get pains, it’s really only your faidt. ’She replied: ‘If you only knew what pains 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] This is the first dream which I submitted to a detailed 
interpretation. [Freud describes some first groping attempts at the analysis of his 
own dreams in Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and Freud, 1895). They will be found 
mentioned in the course of the long footnote attached to the entry of May 1 5 
in the Case History of Frau Emmy von N. This passage is quoted in full in the 
Editor’s Introduction (pp. xiii £).] 




132 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


I’ve got now in my throat and stomach and abdotnen — it’s choking me ’ — / 
was alarmed and looked at her. She looked pale and puffy. I thought to myself 
that afier all I must be missing some organic trouble. I took her to the window 
and looked down her throat, and she shoived signs of recalcitrance, like ivomen 
with artificial dentures. I thought to myself that there ivas really no need for 
her to do that. — She then opened her mouth properly and on the right I found 
a big ivhite 1 patch; at another place I saiv extensive whitish grey scabs upon 
some remarkable curly structures ivhich ivere evidently modelled on the 
turbinal bones of the nose. — I at once called in Dr. M., and he repeated the 
examination and confirmed it. . . . Dr. M. looked qtiite different from usual; 
he was very pale, he walked with a limp and his chin was clean-shaven. . . . 
My friend Otto was noiv standing beside her as well, and my friend Leopold 
was percussing her through her bodice and saying: ‘She has a dull area low 
down on the left.’ He also indicated that a portion of the skin on the left shoul- 
der ivas infiltrated. (I noticed this, just as he did, in spite of her dress.) . . . M. 
said: ‘There’s no doubt it’s an infection, btit no matter; dysentery ivill super- 
vene and the toxin will be eliminated.’ ... We were directly aware, too, of the 
origin of her infection. Not long before, when she ivas feeling unwell, my 
friend Otto had given her an injection of a preparation of propyl, propyls . . . 
propionic acid . . . trimethylamin (and I saw before me the formida for this 
printed in heavy type). . . . Injections of that sort ought not to be made so 
thoughtlessly. . . . And probably the syringe had not been clean. 

This dream has one advantage over many others. It was immediately 
clear what events of the previous day provided its starting-point. My pre- 
amble makes that plain. The news which Otto had given me of Irma’s 
condition and the case history which I had been engaged in writing till 
far into the night continued to occupy my mental activity even after I was 
asleep. Nevertheless, no one who had only read the preamble and the 
content of the dream itself could have the slightest notion of what the 
dream meant. I myself had no notion. I was astonished at the symptoms 
of which Irma complained to me in the dream, since they were not the 
same as those for which I had treated her. I smiled at the senseless idea of 
an injection of propionic acid and at Dr. M.’s consoling reflections. To- 
wards its end the dream seemed to me to be more obscure and com- 
pressed than it was at the beginning. In order to discover the meaning of 
all this it was necessary to undertake a detailed analysis. 


1 [The word ‘white’ is omitted, no doubt accidentally, in the 1942 edition only.] 




II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream 


133 


Analysis 

The hall — numerous guests, whom we were receiving. We were spending 
that summer at Bellevue, a house standing by itself on one of the hills ad- 
joining the Kahlenberg. 1 The house had formerly been designed as a 
place of entertainment and its reception-rooms were in consequence un- 
usually lofty and hall-like. It was at Bellevue that I had the dream, a few 
days before my wife’s birthday. On the previous day my wife had told me 
that she expected that a number of friends, including Irma, would be 
coming out to visit us on her birthday. My dream was thus anticipating 
this occasion: it was my wife’s birthday and a number of guests, including 
Irma, were being received by us in the large hall at Bellevue. 

I reproached Irma for not having accepted my solution; I said: ‘If you still 
get pains, it’s your own fault.’ I might have said this to her in waking life, 
and I may actually have done so. It was my view at that time (though I 
have since recognized it as a wrong one) that my task was fulfilled when 1 
had informed a patient of the hidden meaning of his symptoms: I con- 
sidered that I was not responsible for whether he accepted the solution or 
not — though this was what success depended on. I owe it to this mistake, 
which I have now fortunately corrected, that my life was made easier at a 
time when, in spite of all my inevitable ignorance, I was expected to pro- 
duce therapeutic successes. — I noticed, however, that the words which 1 
spoke to Irma in the dream showed that I was specially anxious not to be 
responsible for the pains which she still had. If they were her fault they 
could not be mine. Could it be that the purpose of the dream lay in this 
direction? 

Irma s complaint: pains in her throat and abdomen and stomach; it was 
choking her. Pains in the stomach were among my patient’s symptoms but 
were not very prominent; she complained more of feelings of nausea and 
disgust. Pains in the throat and abdomen and constriction of the throat 
played scarcely any part in her illness. I wondered why I decided upon 
this choice of symptoms in the dream but could not think of any expla- 
nation at the moment. 

She looked pale and puffy. My patient always had a rosy complexion. I 
began to suspect that someone else was being substituted for her. 

I was alarmed at the idea that I had missed an organic illness. This, as 
may well be believed, is a perpetual source of anxiety to a specialist whose 


1 [A hill which is a favourite resort in the immediate neighbourhood of Vienna.] 




134 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


practice is almost limited to neurotic patients and who is in the habit of 
attributing to hysteria a great number of symptoms which other physi- 
cians treat as organic. On the other hand, a faint doubt crept into my 
mind — from where, I could not tell — that my alarm was not entirely gen- 
uine. If Irma’s pains had an organic basis, once again I could not be held 
responsible for curing them; my treatment only set out to get rid of hys- 
terical pains. It occurred to me, in fact, that I was actually ivishing that 
there had been a wrong diagnosis; for, if so, the blame for my lack of suc- 
cess would also have been got rid of. 

I took her to the ivindow to look doivn her throat. She showed some re- 
calcitrance, like women ivith false teeth. I thought to myself that really there 
was no need for her to do that. I had never had any occasion to examine 
Irma’s oral cavity. What happened in the dream reminded me of an ex- 
amination I had carried out some time before of a governess: at a first 
glance she had seemed a picture of youthful beauty, but when it came to 
opening her mouth she had taken measures to conceal her plates. This led 
to recollections of other medical examinations and of little secrets re- 
vealed in the course of them — to the satisfaction of neither party. ‘There 
was really no need for her to do that’ was no doubt intended in the first 
place as a compliment to Irma; but I suspected that it had another mean- 
ing besides. (If one carries out an analysis attentively, one gets a feeling of 
whether or not one has exhausted all the background thoughts that are to 
be expected.) The way in which Irma stood by the window suddenly re- 
minded me of another experience. Irma had an intimate woman friend 
of whom I had a very high opinion. When I visited this lady one evening 
1 had found her by a window in the situation reproduced in the dream, 
and her physician, the same Dr. M., had pronounced that she had a diph- 
theritic membrane. The figure of Dr. M. and the membrane reappear 
later in the dream. It now occurred to me that for the last few months I 
had had every reason to suppose that this other lady was also a hysteric. 
Indeed, Irma herself had betrayed the fact to me. What did I know of her 
condition? One thing precisely: that, like my Irma of the dream, she suf- 
fered from hysterical choking. So in the dream I had replaced my patient 
by her friend. I now recollected that I had often played with the idea that 
she too might ask me to relieve her of her symptoms. I myself, however, 
had thought this unlikely, since she was of a very reserved nature. She was 
recalcitrant , as was shown in the dream. Another reason was that there was 
no need for her to do it: she had so far shown herself strong enough to mas- 



II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream 


135 


ter her condition without outside help. There still remained a few features 
that I could not attach either to Irma or to her friend: pale; puffy; false 
teeth. The false teeth took me to the governess whom I have already men- 
tioned; I now felt inclined to be satisfied with bad teeth. I then thought 
of someone else to whom these features might be alluding. She again was 
not one of my patients, nor should I have liked to have her as a patient, 
since I had noticed that she was bashful in my presence and I could not 
think she would make an amenable patient. She was usually pale, and 
once, while she had been in specially good health, she had looked puffy . 1 
Thus I had been comparing my patient Irma with two other people who 
would also have been recalcitrant to treatment. What could the reason 
have been for my having exchanged her in the dream for her friend? Per- 
haps it was that I should have liked to exchange her: either I felt more 
sympathetic towards her friend or had a higher opinion of her intelli- 
gence. For Irma seemed to me foolish because she had not accepted my 
solution. Her friend would have been wiser, that is to say she would have 
yielded sooner. She would then have opened her mouth properly, and have 
told me more than Irma . 2 

What I saw in her throat: a white patch and turbinal bones with scabs on 
them. The white patch reminded me of diphtheritis and so of Irma’s 
friend, but also of a serious illness of my eldest daughter’s almost two years 
earlier and of the fright I had had in those anxious days. The scabs on the 
turbinal bones recalled a worry about my own state of health. I was mak- 
ing frequent use of cocaine at that time to reduce some troublesome nasal 
swellings, and I had heard a few days earlier that one of my women pa- 
tients who had followed my example had developed an extensive necrosis 


1 The still unexplained complaint about pains in the abdomen could also be traced 
back to this third figure. The person in question was, of course, my own wife; 
the pains in the abdomen reminded me of one of the occasions on which I had 
noticed her bashfulness. I was forced to admit to myself that I was not treating 
either Irma or my wife very kindly in this dream; but it should be observed by 
way of excuse that I was measuring them both by the standard of the good and 
amenable patient. 

2 1 had a feeling that the interpretation of this part of the dream was not carried far 
enough to make it possible to follow the whole of its concealed meaning. If I had 
pursued my comparison between the three women, it would have taken me far 
afield. — There is at least one spot in every dream at which it is unplumbable — a 
navel, as it were, that is its point of contact with the unknown. [Cf. p. 528.] 




136 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


of the nasal mucous membrane. I had been the first to recommend the use 
of cocaine, in 1885, 1 and this recommendation had brought serious re- 
proaches down on me. The misuse of that drug had hastened the death of 
a dear friend of mine. This had been before 1895 [the date of the dream], 

I at once called in Dr. M., and he repeated the examination. This simply 
corresponded to the position occupied by M. in our circle. But the ‘at 
owcf'was sufficiently striking to require a special explanation. 2 It re- 
minded me of a tragic event in my practice. I had on one occasion pro- 
duced a severe toxic state in a woman patient by repeatedly prescribing 
what was at that time regarded as a harmless remedy (sulphonal), and had 
hurriedly turned for assistance and support to my experienced senior col- 
league. There was a subsidiary detail which confirmed the idea that I had 
this incident in mind. My patient — who succumbed to the poison — had 
the same name as my eldest daughter. It had never occurred to me before, 
but it struck me now almost like an act of retribution on the part of des- 
tiny. It was as though the replacement of one person by another was to be 
continued in another sense: this Mathilde for that Mathilde, an eye for 
an eye and a tooth for a tooth. It seemed as if I had been collecting all the 
occasions which I could bring up against myself as evidence of lack of 
medical conscientiousness. 

Dr M. ivas pale, had a clean-shaven chin and walked with a limp. This 
was true to the extent that his unhealthy appearance often caused his 
friends anxiety. The two other features could only apply to someone else. 
I thought of my elder brother, who lives abroad, who is clean-shaven and 
whom, if I remembered right, the M. of the dream closely resembled. We 
had had news a few days earlier that he was walking with a limp owing to 
an arthritic affection of his hip. There must, I reflected, have been some 
reason for my fusing into one the two figures in the dream. I then re- 
membered that I had a similar reason for being in an ill-humour with 
each of them: they had both rejected a certain suggestion I had recently 
laid before them. 


1 [This is a misprint (which occurs in every German edition) for T884,’ the date 
of Freud’s first paper on cocaine. A full account of Freud’s work in connection 
with cocaine will be found in Chapter VI of the first volume of Ernest Jones’s life 
of Freud. From this it appears that the ‘dear friend’ was Fleischl von Marxow (see 
p. 487 n.). Further indirect allusions to this episode will be found on pp. 194 fi, 
228, 237 f. and 490.] 

2 [See below, p. 517.] 




II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream 


137 


My friend Otto was now standing beside the patient and my friend 
Leopold was examining her and indicated that there was a dull area low 
doivn on the left. My friend Leopold was also a physician and a relauve of 
Otto’s. Since they both specialized in the same branch of medicine, it was 
their fate to be in competition with each other, and comparisons were 
constantly being drawn between them. Both of them acted as my assis- 
tants for years while I was still in charge of the neurological out-patients’ 
department of a children’s hospital. 1 Scenes such as the one represented 
in the dream used often to occur there. While I was discussing the diag- 
nosis of a case with Otto, Leopold would be examining the child once 
more and would make an unexpected contribution to our decision. The 
difference between their characters was like that between the bailiff Brasig 
and his friend Karl: 2 one was distinguished for his quickness, while the 
other was slow but sure. If in the dream I was contrasting Otto with the 
prudent Leopold, I was evidently doing so to the advantage of the latter. 
The comparison was similar to the one between my disobedient patient 
Irma and the friend whom I regarded as wiser than she was. I now per- 
ceived another of the lines along which the chain of thought in the dream 
branched off: from the sick child to the children’s hospital. — The didl 
area low down on the left seemed to me to agree in every detail with one 
particular case in which Leopold had struck me by his thoroughness. I 
also had a vague notion of something in the nature of a metastatic affec- 
tion; but this may also have been a reference to the patient whom I 
should have liked to have in the place of Irma. So far as I had been able 
to judge, she had produced an imitation of a tuberculosis. 

A portion of the skin on the left shoulder was infiltrated. I saw at once 
that this was the rheumatism in my own shoulder, which I invariably no- 
tice if I sit up late into the night. Moreover the wording in the dream was 
most ambiguous: ‘I noticed this, just as he did. . . .’ 1 noticed it in my own 
body, that is. I was struck, too, by the unusual phrasing: ‘a portion of the 
skin was infiltrated.’ We are in the habit of speaking of ‘a left upper pos- 
terior infiltration,’ and this would refer to the lung and so once more to 
tuberculosis. 


1 [For details of this hospital see Section II of Kris’s introduction to the Fliess cor- 
respondence (Freud, 1950 a).] 

2 [The two chief figures in the once popular novel, Ut mine Stromtid , written in 
Mecklenburg dialect, by Fritz Reuter (1862-4). There is an English translation, 
An Old Story of My Farming Days {London, 1878).] 




138 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


In spite of her dress. This was in any case only an interpolation. We nat- 
urally used to examine the children in the hospital undressed: and this 
would be a contrast to the manner in which adult female patients have to 
be examined. I remembered that it was said of a celebrated clinician that 
he never made a physical examination of his patients except through their 
clothes. Further than this I could not see. Frankly, I had no desire to pen- 
etrate more deeply at this point. 

Dr. M. said: It’s an infection, but no matter. Dysentery will supervene and 
the toxin will be eliminated. ’At first this struck me as ridiculous. But nev- 
ertheless, like all the rest, it had to be carefully analysed. When I came to 
look at it more closely it seemed to have some sort of meaning all the 
same. What I discovered in the patient was a local diphtheritis. I remem- 
bered from the time of my daughter’s illness a discussion on diphtheritis 
and diphtheria, the latter being the general infection that arises from the 
local diphtheritis. Leopold indicated the presence of a general infection of 
this kind from the existence of a dull area, which might thus be regarded 
as a metastatic focus. I seemed to think, it is true, that metastases like this 
do not in fact occur with diphtheria: it made me think rather of pyaemia. 

No matter. This was intended as a consolation. It seemed to fit into the 
context as follows. The content of the preceding part of the dream had been 
that my patient’s pains were due to a severe organic affection. I had a feeling 
that I was only trying in that way to shift the blame from myself. Psycho- 
logical treatment could not be held responsible for the persistence of diph- 
theritic pains. Nevertheless I had a sense of awkwardness at having invented 
such a severe illness for Irma simply in order to clear myself. It looked so 
cruel. Thus I was in need of an assurance that all would be well in the end, 
and it seemed to me that to have put the consolation into the mouth pre- 
cisely of Dr. M. had not been a bad choice. But here I was taking up a su- 
perior attitude towards the dream, and this itself required explanation. 

And why was the consolation so nonsensical? 

Dysentery. There seemed to be some remote theoretical notion that 
morbid matter can be eliminated through the bowels. Could it be that I 
was trying to make fun of Dr. M.’s fertility in producing far-fetched ex- 
planations and making unexpected pathological connections? Something 
else now occurred to me in relation to dysentery. A few months earlier I 
had taken on the case of a young man with remarkable difficulties associ- 
ated with defaecating, who had been treated by other physicians as a case 
of ‘anaemia accompanied by malnutrition.’ I had recognized it as a hys- 
teria, but had been unwilling to try him with my psychotherapeutic treat- 



II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream 


139 


ment and had sent him on a sea voyage. Some days before, I had had a 
despairing letter from him from Egypt, saying that he had had a fresh at- 
tack there which a doctor had declared was dysentery. I suspected that the 
diagnosis was an error on the part of an ignorant practitioner who had al- 
lowed himself to be taken in by the hysteria. But I could not help re- 
proaching myself for having put my patient in a situation in which he 
might have contracted some organic trouble on top of his hysterical in- 
testinal disorder. Moreover ‘dysentery’ sounds not unlike ‘diphtheria’ — a 
word of ill omen which did not occur in the dream . 1 

Yes, I thought to myself, I must have been making fun of Dr. M. with 
the consoling prognosis ‘Dysentery will supervene,’ etc.: for it came back 
to me that, years before, he himself had told an amusing story of a similar 
kind about another doctor. Dr. M. had been called in by him for consul- 
tation over a patient who was seriously ill, and had felt obliged to point 
out, in view of the very optimistic view taken by his colleague, that he 
had found albumen in the patient’s urine. The other, however, was not 
in the least put out: ‘No matter ,’ he had said, ‘the albumen will soon be 
eliminated!’ — I could no longer feel any doubt, therefore, that this part 
of the dream was expressing derision at physicians who are ignorant of 
hysteria. And, as though to confirm this, a further idea crossed my mind: 
‘Does Dr. M. realize that the symptoms in his patient (Irma’s friend) 
which give grounds for fearing tuberculosis also have a hysterical basis? 
Has he spotted this hysteria? or has he been taken in by it?’ 

But what could be my motive for treating this friend of mine so badly? 
That was a very simple matter. Dr. M. was just as little in agreement with 
my ‘solution’ as Irma herself. So I had already revenged myself in this 
dream on two people: on Irma with the words ‘If you still get pains, it’s 
your own fault,’ and on Dr. M. by the wording of the nonsensical conso- 
lation that I put into his mouth. 

We were directly aware of the origin of the infection. This direct knowl- 
edge in the dream was remarkable. Only just before we had had no 
knowledge of it, for the infection was only revealed by Leopold. 

When she was feeling unwell my friend Otto had given her an injection. 
Otto had in fact told me that during his short stay with Irma’s family he had 
been called in to a neighbouring hotel to give an injection to someone who 
had suddenly felt unwell. These injections reminded me once more of my 


1 [The German words ‘ Dysenterie’ and ' Diphtherie are more alike than the English 
ones.] 




140 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


unfortunate friend who had poisoned himself with cocaine [see p. 136 ».]. I 
had advised him to use the drug internally [i.e. orally] only, while morphia 
was being withdrawn; but he had at once given himself cocaine injections. 

A preparation of propyl . . . propyls . . . propionic acid. How could I have 
come to think of this? During the previous evening, before I wrote out 
the case history and had the dream, my wife had opened a bottle of 
liqueur, on which the word ‘Ananas’ 1 appeared and which was a gift from 
our friend Otto: for he has a habit of making presents on every possible 
occasion. It was to be hoped, I thought to myself, that some day he would 
find a wife to cure him of the habit. 2 This liqueur gave off such a strong 
smell of fusel oil that I refused to touch it. My wife suggested our giving 
the bottle to the servants, but I — with even greater prudence — vetoed the 
suggestion, adding in a philanthropic spirit that there was no need for 
them to be poisoned either. The smell of fusel oil (amyl . . .) evidently 
stirred up in my mind a recollection of the whole series — propyl, methyl, 
and so on — and this accounted for the propyl preparation in the dream. 
It is true that I carried out a substitution in the process: 1 dreamt of 
propyl after having smelt amyl. But substitutions of this kind are perhaps 
legitimate in organic chemistry. 

Trimethylamin. I saw the chemical formula of this substance in my 
dream, which bears witness to a great effort on the part of my memory. 
Moreover the formula was printed in heavy type, as though there had 
been a desire to lay emphasis on some part of the context as being of quite 
special importance. What was it, then, to which my attention was to be 
directed in this way by trimethylamin? It was to a conversation with an- 
other friend who had for many years been familiar with all my writings 
during the period of their gestation, just as I had been with his. 3 He had 
at that time confided some ideas to me on the subject of the chemistry of 


1 1 must add that the sound of the word ‘Ananas’ bears a remarkable resemblance 
to that of my patient Irma’s family name. 

1 \Footnote added 1909, but omitted again from 1925 onwards:] In this respect the 
dream did not turn out to be prophetic. But in another respect it was. For my 
patient’s ‘unsolved’ gastric pains, for which I was so anxious not to be blamed, 
turned out to be the forerunners of a serious disorder caused by gall-stones. 

3 [This was Wilhelm Fliess, the Berlin biologist and nose and throat specialist, 
who exercised a great influence on Freud during the years immediately preceding 
the publication of this book, and who figures frequently, though as a rule anony- 
mously, in its pages. See Freud (1950a).] 




II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream 


141 


the sexual processes, and had mentioned among other things that he be- 
lieved that one of the products of sexual metabolism was trimethylamin. 
Thus this substance led me to sexuality, the factor to which I attributed 
the greatest importance in the origin of the nervous disorders which it 
was my aim to cure. My patient Irma was a young widow; if I wanted to 
find an excuse for the failure of my treatment in her case, what I could 
best appeal to would no doubt be this fact of her widowhood, which her 
friends would be so glad to see changed. And how strangely, I thought to 
myself, a dream like this is put together! The other woman, whom I had 
as a patient in the dream instead of Irma, was also a young widow. 

I began to guess why the formula for trimethylamin had been so 
prominent in the dream. So many important subjects converged upon 
that one word. Trimethylamin was an allusion not only to the immensely 
powerful factor of sexuality, but also to a person whose agreement I re- 
called with satisfaction whenever I felt isolated in my opinions. Surely this 
friend who played so large a part in my life must appear again elsewhere 
in these trains of thought. Yes. For he had a special knowledge of the con- 
sequences of affections of the nose and its accessory cavities; and he had 
drawn scientific attention to some very remarkable connections between 
the turbinal bones and the female organs of sex. (Cf. the three curly struc- 
tures in Irma’s throat.) I had had Irma examined by him to see whether 
her gastric pains might be of nasal origin. But he suffered himself from 
suppurative rhinitis, which caused me anxiety; and no doubt there was an 
allusion to this in the pyaemia which vaguely came into my mind in con- 
nection with the metastases in the dream . 1 

Injections of that sort ought not to he made so thoughtlessly. Here an ac- 
cusation of thoughtlessness was being made directly against my friend 
Otto. I seemed to remember thinking something of the same kind that 
afternoon when his words and looks had appeared to show that he was 
siding against me. It had been some such notion as: ‘How easily his 
thoughts are influenced! How thoughtlessly he jumps to conclusions!’ — 
Apart from this, this sentence in the dream reminded me once more of 
my dead friend who had so hastily resorted to cocaine injections. As 
I have said, I had never contemplated the drug being given by injection. 


1 [The analysis of this part of the dream is further elaborated below (pp. 310 ff.). 
It had already been used by Freud as an example of the mechanism of displace- 
ment in Section 21 of Part I of his very early ‘Project for a Scientific Psychology,’ 
written in the autumn of 1895 and printed as an Appendix to Freud (1950a).] 




142 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


I noticed too that in accusing Otto of thoughtlessness in handling chem- 
ical substances I was once more touching upon the story of the unfortu- 
nate Mathilde, which gave grounds for the same accusation against 
myself. Here I was evidently collecting instances of my conscientiousness, 
but also of the reverse. 

And probably the syringe had not been clean. This was yet another accu- 
sation against Otto, but derived from a different source. I had happened 
the day before to meet the son of an old lady of eighty-two, to whom I 
had to give an injection of morphia twice a day . 1 At the moment she was 
in the country and he told me that she was suffering from phlebitis. I had 
at once thought it must be an infiltration caused by a dirty syringe. I was 
proud of the fact that in two years I had not caused a single infiltration; I 
took constant pains to be sure that the syringe was clean. In short, I was 
conscientious. The phlebitis brought me back once more to my wife, who 
had suffered from thrombosis during one of her pregnancies; and now 
three similar situations came to my recollection involving my wife, Irma 
and the dead Mathilde. The identity of these situations had evidently en- 
abled me to substitute the three figures for one another in the dream. 

I have now completed the interpretation of the dream . 2 While I was 
carrying it out I had some difficulty in keeping at bay all the ideas which 
were bound to be provoked by a comparison between the content of the 
dream and the concealed thoughts lying behind it. And in the meantime 
the ‘meaning’ of the dream was borne in upon me. I became aware of an 
intention which was carried into effect by the dream and which must 
have been my motive for dreaming it. The dream fulfilled certain wishes 
which were started in me by the events of the previous evening (the news 
given me by Otto and my writing out of the case history). The conclu- 
sion of the dream, that is to say, was that I was not responsible for the per- 
sistence of Irma’s pains, but that Otto was. Otto had in fact annoyed me 
by his remarks about Irma’s incomplete cure, and the dream gave me my 
revenge by throwing the reproach back on to him. The dream acquitted 


1 [This old lady makes frequent appearances in Freud’s writings at this period. See 
below, pp. 258 £, and The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901 b), Chapter 
VIII (b and g) and Chapter VII (Cb). Her death is reported in a letter to Fliess 
of July 8, 1901 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 145).] 

2 [ Footnote added 1909:] Though it will be understood that I have not reported 
everything that occurred to me during the process of interpretation. 




II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream 


143 


me of the responsibility for Irma’s condition by showing that it was due 
to other factors — it produced a whole series of reasons. The dream repre- 
sented a particular state of affairs as I should have wished it to be. Thus 
its content was the fulfilment of a ivish and its motive was a ivish. 

Thus much leapt to the eyes. But many of the details of the dream also 
became intelligible to me from the point of view of wish-fulfilment. Not 
only did I revenge myself on Otto for being too hasty in taking sides 
against me by representing him as being too hasty in his medical treat- 
ment (in giving the injection); but I also revenged myself on him for giv- 
ing me the bad liqueur which had an aroma of fusel oil. And in the dream 
I found an expression which united the two reproaches: the injection was 
of a preparation of propyl. This did not satisfy me and I pursued my re- 
venge further by contrasting him with his more trustworthy competitor. 
I seemed to be saying: ‘I like him better than you! But Otto was not the 
only person to suffer from the vials of my wrath. I took revenge as well on 
my disobedient patient by exchanging her for one who was wiser and less 
recalcitrant. Nor did I allow Dr. M. to escape the consequences of his 
contradiction but showed him by means of a clear allusion that he was 
an ignoramus on the subject. (I Dysentery will supervene ,’ etc.) Indeed I 
seemed to be appealing from him to someone else with greater knowledge 
(to my friend who had told me of trimethylamin) just as I had turned 
from Irma to her friend and from Otto to Leopold. ‘Take these people 
away! Give me three others of my choice instead! Then I shall be free of 
these undeserved reproaches!’ The groundlessness of the reproaches was 
proved for me in the dream in the most elaborate fashion. / was not to 
blame for Irma’s pains, since she herself was to blame for them by refusing 
to accept my solution. / was not concerned with Irma’s pains, since they 
were of an organic nature and quite incurable by psychological treatment. 
Irma’s pains could be satisfactorily explained by her widowhood (cf. the 
trimethylamin) which I had no means of altering. Irma’s pains had been 
caused by Otto giving her an incautious injection of an unsuitable drug — 
a thing / should never have done. Irma’s pains were the result of an injec- 
tion with a dirty needle, like my old lady’s phlebitis — whereas I never did 
any harm with my injections. I noticed, it is true, that these explanations 
of Irma’s pains (which agreed in exculpating me) were not entirely con- 
sistent with one another, and indeed that they were mutually exclusive. 
The whole plea — for the dream was nothing else — reminded one vividly 
of the defence put forward by the man who was charged by one of his 
neighbours with having given him back a borrowed kettle in a damaged 



144 


II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams 


condition. The defendant asserted first, that he had given it back undam- 
aged; secondly, that the kettle had a hole in it when he borrowed it; and 
thirdly, that he had never borrowed a kettle from his neighbour at all. So 
much the better: if only a single one of these three lines of defence were 
to be accepted as valid, the man would have to be acquitted. 1 

Certain other themes played a part in the dream, which were not so 
obviously connected with my exculpation from Irma’s illness: my daugh- 
ter’s illness and that of my patient who bore the same name, the injurious 
effect of cocaine, the disorder of my patient who was travelling in Egypt, 
my concern about my wife’s health and about that of my brother and of 
Dr. M., my own physical ailments, my anxiety about my absent friend 
who suffered from suppurative rhinitis. But when I came to consider all 
of these, they could all be collected into a single group of ideas and la- 
belled, as it were, ‘concern about my own and other people’s health — 
professional conscientiousness.’ I called to mind the obscure disagreeable 
impression I had when Otto brought me the news of Irma’s condition. 
This group of thoughts that played a part in the dream enabled me retro- 
spectively to put this transient impression into words. It was as though he 
had said to me: ‘You don’t take your medical duties seriously enough. 
You’re not conscientious; you don’t carry out what you’ve undertaken.’ 
Thereupon, this group of thoughts seemed to have put itself at my dis- 
posal, so that I could produce evidence of how highly conscientious I was, 
of how deeply I was concerned about the health of my relations, my 
friends and my patients. It was a noteworthy fact that this material also 
included some disagreeable memories, which supported my friend Otto’s 
accusation rather than my own vindication. The material was, as one 
might say, impartial; but nevertheless there was an unmistakable connec- 
tion between this more extensive group of thoughts which underlay the 
dream and the narrower subject of the dream which gave rise to the wish 
to be innocent of Irma’s illness. 

I will not pretend that I have completely uncovered the meaning of 
this dream or that its interpretation is without a gap. 1 could spend much 
more time over it, derive further information from it and discuss fresh 
problems raised by it. I myself know the points from which further trains 
of thought could be followed. But considerations which arise in the case 


1 [This anecdote is discussed by Freud in relation to this passage in Chapter II, 
Section 8, and Chapter VII, Section 2, of his book on jokes. (Freud, 1905c.)] 




II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream 


145 


of every dream of my own restrain me from pursuing my interpretative 
work. If anyone should feel tempted to express a hasty condemnation of 
my reticence, I would advise him to make the experiment of being 
franker than I am. For the moment I am satisfied with the achievement 
of this one piece of fresh knowledge. If we adopt the method of interpret- 
ing dreams which I have indicated here, we shall find that dreams really 
have a meaning and are far from being the expression of a fragmentary 
activity of the brain, as the authorities have claimed. When the work of in- 
terpretation has been completed, ive perceive that a dream is the fulfilment of 
a wish . 1 


1 [In a letter to Fliess on June 12, 1900 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 137), Freud de- 
scribes a later visit to Bellevue, the house where he had this dream. ‘Do you sup- 
pose,’ he writes, ‘that some day a marble tablet will be placed on the house, 
inscribed with these words? — 


In This House, on July 24th, 1895 
the Secret of Dreams was Revealed 
to Dr. Sigm. Freud 


At the moment there seems little prospect of it.’] 





CHAPTER III 


A DREAM IS THE FULFILMENT OF A WISH 


When, after passing through a narrow defile, we suddenly emerge upon 
a piece of high ground, where the path divides and the finest prospects 
open up on every side, we may pause for a moment and consider in 
which direction we shall first turn our steps. 1 Such is the case with us, 
now that we have surmounted the first interpretation of a dream. We find 
ourselves in the full daylight of a sudden discovery. Dreams are not to be 
likened to the unregulated sounds that rise from a musical instrument 
struck by the blow of some external force instead of by a player’s hand 
[cf. p. 104 f.]; they are not meaningless, they are not absurd; they do not 
imply that one portion of our store of ideas is asleep while another por- 
tion is beginning to wake. On the contrary, they are psychical phenomena 
of complete validity — fulfilments of wishes; they can be inserted into the 
chain of intelligible waking mental acts; they are constructed by a highly 
complicated activity of the mind. 

But no sooner have we begun to rejoice at this discovery than we are 
assailed by a flood of questions. If, as we are told by dream-interpretation, 


1 [In a letter to Fliess of August 6, 1899 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 114), Freud de- 
scribes the opening chapters of this book as follows: ‘The whole thing is planned 
on the model of an imaginary walk. First comes the dark wood of the authorities 
(who cannot see the trees), where there is no clear view and it is easy to go astray. 
Then there is a cavernous defile through which I lead my readers — my specimen 
dream with its peculiarities, its details, its indiscretions and its bad jokes — and 
then, all at once, the high ground and the open prospect and the question: 
“Which way do you want to go?’”] 


147 




148 


III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


a dream represents a fulfilled wish, what is the origin of the remarkable 
and puzzling form in which the wish-fulfilment is expressed? What alter- 
ation have the dream-thoughts undergone before being changed into the 
manifest dream which we remember when we wake up? How does that 
alteration take place? What is the source of the material that has been 
modified into the dream? What is the source of the many peculiarities 
that are to be observed in the dream-thoughts — such, for instance, as the 
fact that they may be mutually contradictory? (Cf. the analogy of the bor- 
rowed kettle on pp. 143 f.) Can a dream tell us anything new about our 
internal psychical processes? Can its content correct opinions we have 
held during the day? 

I propose that for the moment we should leave all these questions on 
one side and pursue our way further along one particular path. We have 
learnt that a dream can represent a wish as fulfilled. Our first concern 
must be to enquire whether this is a universal characteristic of dreams or 
whether it merely happened to be the content of the particular dream 
(the dream of Irma’s injection) which was the first that we analysed. For 
even if we are prepared to find that every dream has a meaning and a psy- 
chical value, the possibility must remain open of this meaning not being 
the same in every dream. Our first dream was the fulfilment of a wish; a 
second one might turn out to be a fulfilled fear; the content of a third 
might be a reflection; while a fourth might merely reproduce a memory. 
Shall we find other wishful dreams besides this one? or are there perhaps 
no dreams but wishful ones? 

It is easy to prove that dreams often reveal themselves without any dis- 
guise as fulfilments of wishes; so that it may seem surprising that the lan- 
guage of dreams was not understood long ago. For instance, there is a 
dream that I can produce in myself as often as I like — experimentally, as it 
were. If I eat anchovies or olives or any other highly salted food in the 
evening, I develop thirst during the night which wakes me up. But my wak- 
ing is preceded by a dream; and this always has the same content, namely, 
that I am drinking. 1 dream I am swallowing down water in great gulps, 
and it has the delicious taste that nothing can equal but a cool drink when 
one is parched with thirst. Then I wake up and have to have a real drink. 
This simple dream is occasioned by the thirst which I become aware of 
when I wake. The thirst gives rise to a wish to drink, and the dream shows 
me that wish fulfilled. In doing so it is performing a function — which it 
was easy to divine. I am a good sleeper and not accustomed to be woken by 



III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


149 


any physical need. If I can succeed in appeasing my thirst by dreaming that 
I am drinking, then I need not wake up in order to quench it. This, then, 
is a dream of convenience. Dreaming has taken the place of action, as it of- 
ten does elsewhere in life. Unluckily my need for water to quench my thirst 
cannot be satisfied by a dream in the same way as my thirst for revenge 
against my friend Otto and Dr. M.; but the good intention is there in both 
cases. Not long ago this same dream of mine showed some modification. I 
had felt thirsty even before I fell asleep, and I had emptied a glass of water 
that stood on the table beside my bed. A few hours later during the night I 
had a fresh attack of thirst, and this had inconvenient results. In order to 
provide myself with some water I should have had to get up and fetch the 
glass standing on the table by my wife’s bed. I therefore had an appropriate 
dream that my wife was giving me a drink out of a vase; this vase was an 
Etruscan cinerary urn which I had brought back from a journey to Italy and 
had since given away. But the water in it tasted so salty (evidently because 
of the ashes in the urn) that I woke up. It will be noticed how conveniently 
everything was arranged in this dream. Since its only purpose was to fulfil a 
wish, it could be completely egoistical. A love of comfort and convenience 
is not really compatible with consideration for other people. The introduc- 
tion of the cinerary urn was probably yet another wish-fulfilment. I was 
sorry that the vase was no longer in my possession — just as the glass of wa- 
ter on my wife’s table was out of my reach. The urn with its ashes fitted in, 
too, with the salty taste in my mouth which had now grown stronger and 
which I knew was bound to wake me . 1 


1 Weygandt (1893, 41) was aware of the occurrence of thirst dreams, for he writes: 
‘The sensation of thirst is perceived with greater precision than any other; it al- 
ways gives rise to an idea of its being quenched. The manner in which the thirst 
is represented as being quenched in the dream varies, and derives its special form 
from some near-by memory. Another general feature in these cases is that imme- 
diately after the idea of the thirst being quenched there follows a disappointment 
over the small effect produced by the imaginary refreshment.’ Weygandt, how- 
ever, overlooks the fact that this reaction of a dream to a stimulus is one which 
holds good universally. Other people who are attacked by thirst in the night may 
wake up without having had a dream; but that is no objection to my experi- 
ment. It merely shows that they are worse sleepers than I am . — [ Added 1914:] 
Compare in this connection Isaiah xxix, 8: ‘It shall even be as when an hungry 
man dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: 
or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, 
and, behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite.’ 




150 


III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


Dreams of convenience like these were very frequent in my youth. 
Having made it a practice as far back as I can remember to work late into 
the night, I always found it difficult to wake early. I used then to have a 
dream of being out of bed and standing by the washing-stand; after a 
while 1 was no longer able to disguise from myself the fact that I was 
really still in bed, but in the meantime I had had a little more sleep. A 
slothful dream of this kind, which was expressed in a particularly amusing 
and elegant form, has been reported to me by a young medical colleague 
who seems to share my liking for sleep. The landlady of his lodgings in 
the neighbourhood of the hospital had strict instructions to wake him 
in time every morning but found it no easy job to carry them out. One 
morning sleep seemed peculiarly sweet. The landlady called through the 
door: ‘Wake up, Herr Pepi! It’s time to go to the hospital!’ In response to 
this he had a dream that he was lying in bed in a room in the hospital, 
and that there was a card over the bed on which was written: ‘Pepi H., 
medical student, age 22.’ While he was dreaming, he said to himself, ‘As 
I’m already in the hospital, there’s no need for me to go there’ — and 
turned over and went on sleeping. In this way he openly confessed the 
motive for his dream. 1 

Here is another dream in which once again the stimulus produced its 
effect during actual sleep. One of my women patients, who had been 
obliged to undergo an operation on her jaw which had taken an un- 
favourable course, was ordered by her doctors to wear a cooling apparatus 
on the side of her face day and night. But as soon as she fell asleep she 
used to throw it off. One day, after she had once more thrown the appa- 
ratus on the floor, I was asked to speak to her seriously about it. ‘This 
time I really couldn’t help it,’ she answered. ‘It was because of a dream I 
had in the night. I dreamt I was in a box at the opera and very much en- 
joying the performance. But Herr Karl Meyer was in the nursing-home 
and complaining bitterly of pains in his jaw. So I told myself that as I 
hadn’t any pain I didn’t need the apparatus; and I threw it away.’ The 
dream of this poor sufferer seems almost like a concrete representation of 
a phrase that sometimes forces its way on to people’s lips in unpleasant 
situations: ‘I must say I could think of something more agreeable than 
this.’ The dream gives a picture of this more agreeable thing. The Herr 


3 [This dream was reported by Freud in a letter to Fliess, dated March 4, 1895 
(Freud, 1950a, Letter 22) — the earliest recorded hint at the wish-fulfilment 
theory.] 




III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


151 


Karl Meyer on to whom the dreamer transplanted her pains was the most 
indifferent young man of her acquaintance that she could call to mind. 

The wish-fulfilment can be detected equally easily in some other 
dreams which I have collected from normal people. A friend of mine, 
who knows my theory of dreams and has told his wife of it, said to me 
one day: ‘My wife has asked me to tell you that she had a dream yesterday 
that she was having her period. You can guess what that means.’ I could 
indeed guess it. The fact that this young married woman dreamt that she 
was having her period meant that she had missed her period. I could well 
believe that she would have been glad to go on enjoying her freedom a lit- 
tle longer before shouldering the burden of motherhood. It was a neat 
way of announcing her first pregnancy. Another friend of mine wrote and 
told me that, not long before, his wife had dreamt that she had noticed 
some milk stains on the front of her vest. This too was an announcement 
of pregnancy, but not of a first one. The young mother was wishing that 
she might have more nourishment to give her second child than she had 
had for her first. 

A young woman had been cut off from society for weeks on end while 
she nursed her child through an infectious illness. After the child’s recov- 
ery, she had a dream of being at a party at which, among others, she met 
Alphonse Daudet, Paul Bourget, and Marcel Prevost; they were all most 
affable to her and highly amusing. All of the authors resembled their por- 
traits, except Marcel Prevost, of whom she had never seen a picture; and 
he looked like . . . the disinfection officer who had fumigated the sick- 
room the day before and who had been her first visitor for so long. Thus 
it seems possible to give a complete translation of the dream: ‘It’s about 
time for something more amusing than this perpetual sick-nursing.’ 

These examples will perhaps be enough to show that dreams which can 
only be understood as fulfilments of wishes and which bear their meaning 
upon their faces without disguise are to be found under the most frequent 
and various conditions. They are mostly short and simple dreams, which 
afford a pleasant contrast to the confused and exuberant compositions that 
have in the main attracted the attention of the authorities. Nevertheless, it 
will repay us to pause for a moment over these simple dreams. We may ex- 
pect to find the very simplest forms of dreams in children, since there can 
be no doubt that their psychical productions are less complicated than 
those of adults. Child psychology, in my opinion, is destined to perform 
the same useful services for adult psychology that the investigation of the 
structure or development of the lower animals has performed for research 



152 


III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


into the structure of the higher classes of animals. Few deliberate efforts 
have hitherto been made to make use of child psychology for this purpose. 

The dreams of young children are frequently 1 pure wish-fulfilments 
and are in that case 2 quite uninteresting compared with the dreams of 
adults. They raise no problems for solution; but on the other hand they 
are of inestimable importance in proving that, in their essential nature, 
dreams represent fulfilments of wishes. I have been able to collect a few 
instances of such dreams from material provided by my own children. 

I have to thank an excursion which we made to the lovely village of 
Hallstatt 3 in the summer of 1896 for two dreams: one of these was dreamt 
by my daughter, who was then eight and a half, and the other by her 
brother of five and a quarter. I must explain by way of preamble that we 
had been spending the summer on a hillside near Aussee, from which, in 
fine weather, we enjoyed a splendid view of the Dachstein. The Simony 
Hiitte could be clearly distinguished through a telescope. The children 
made repeated attempts at seeing it through the telescope — I cannot say 
with what success. Before our excursion I had told the children that Hall- 
statt lay at the foot of the Dachstein. They very much looked forward to 
the day. From Hallstatt we walked up the Echerntal, which delighted the 
children with its succession of changing landscapes. One of them, however, 
the five-year-old boy, gradually became fretful. Each time a new mountain 
came into view he asked if that was the Dachstein and I had to say, ‘No, 
only one of the foothills.’ After he had asked the question several times, he 
fell completely silent; and he refused point-blank to come with us up the 
steep path to the waterfall. I thought he was tired. But next morning he 
came to me with a radiant face and said; ‘Last night I dreamt we were at 
the Simony Hiitte.’ I understood him then. When I had spoken about the 
Dachstein, he had expected to climb the mountain in the course of our ex- 


1 [This word was added in 1911. The following comment upon this qualifying 
adverb appears in Gesammelte Schrifien, 3 (1925), 21: ‘Experience has shown 
that distorted dreams, which stand in need of interpretation, are already found 
in children of four or five; and this is in full agreement with our theoretical views 
on the determining conditions of distortion in dreams.’] 

2 [Before 1911: ‘for that reason.’] 

3 [In the Salzkammergut district of Upper Austria. — ‘Echerntal’ (below) is mis- 
printed ‘Escherntal’ in all the German editions.] 




III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


153 


cursion to Hallstatt and to find himself at close quarters with the hut 
which there had been so much talk about in connection with the telescope. 
But when he found that he was being fobbed off with foothills and a wa- 
terfall, he felt disappointed and out of spirits. The dream was a compensa- 
tion. I tried to discover its details, but they were scanty: ‘You have to climb 
up steps for six hours’ — which was what he had been told. 

The same excursion stirred up wishes in the eight-and-a-half-year-old 
girl as well — wishes which had to be satisfied in a dream. We had taken 
our neighbour’s twelve-year-old son with us to Hallstatt. He was already 
a full-blown gallant, and there were signs that he had engaged the young 
lady’s affections. Next morning she told me the following dream: ‘Just 
fancy! I had a dream that Emil was one of the family and called you “Fa- 
ther” and “Mother” and slept with us in the big room like the boys. Then 
Mother came in and threw a handful of big bars of chocolate, wrapped 
up in blue and green paper, under our beds.’ Her brothers, who have ev- 
idently not inherited a faculty for understanding dreams, followed the 
lead of the authorities and declared that the dream was nonsense. The girl 
herself defended one part of the dream at least; and it throws light on the 
theory of the neuroses to learn which part. ‘Of course it’s nonsense Emil 
being one of the family; but the part about the bars of chocolate isn’t.’ It 
had been precisely on that point that I had been in the dark, but the girl’s 
mother now gave me the explanation. On their way home from the sta- 
tion the children had stopped in front of a slot-machine from which they 
were accustomed to obtain bars of chocolate of that very kind, wrapped 
in shiny metallic paper. They had wanted to get some; but their mother 
rightly decided that the day had already fulfilled enough wishes and left 
this one over to be fulfilled by the dream. I myself had not observed the 
incident. But the part of the dream which had been proscribed by my 
daughter was immediately clear to me. I myself had heard our well- 
behaved guest telling the children on the walk to wait till Father and 
Mother caught up with them. The little girl’s dream turned this tempo- 
rary kinship into permanent adoption. Her affection was not yet able to 
picture any other forms of companionship than those which were repre- 
sented in the dream and which were based on her relation to her brothers. 
It was of course impossible to discover without questioning her why the 
bars of chocolate were thrown under the beds. 

A friend of mine has reported a dream to me which was very much 
like my son’s. The dreamer was an eight-year-old girl. Her father had 



154 


III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


started off with several children on a walk to Dornbach, 1 with the idea of 
visiting the Rohrer Hiitte. As it was getting late, however, he had turned 
back, promising the children to make up for the disappointment another 
time. On their way home they had passed the signpost that marks the 
path up to the Hameau. The children had then asked to be taken up to 
the Hameau; but once again for the same reason they had to be consoled 
with the promise of another day. Next morning the eight-year-old girl 
came to her father and said in satisfied tones: ‘Daddy, 1 dreamt last night 
that you went with us to the Rohrer Hiitte and the Hameau.’ In her im- 
patience she had anticipated the fulfilment of her father’s promises. 

Here is an equally straightforward dream, provoked by the beauty of the 
scenery at Aussee in another of my daughters, who was at that time three 
and a quarter. She had crossed the lake for the first time, and the crossing 
had been too short for her: when we reached the landing-stage she had not 
wanted to leave the boat and had wept bitterly. Next morning she said: 
‘Last night I went on the lake.’ Let us hope that her dream-crossing had 
been of a more satisfying length. 

My eldest boy, then eight years old, already had dreams of his phan- 
tasies coming true: he dreamt that he was driving in a chariot with 
Achilles and that Diomede was the charioteer. As may be guessed, he had 
been excited the day before by a book on the legends of Greece which had 
been given to his elder sister. 

If I may include words spoken by children in their sleep under the 
heading of dreams, I can at this point quote one of the most youthful 
dreams in my whole collection. My youngest daughter, then nineteen 
months old, had had an attack of vomiting one morning and had conse- 
quently been kept without food all day. During the night after this day of 
starvation she was heard calling out excitedly in her sleep: ‘Anna Fweud, 
stwawbewwies, wild stwaw-bewwies, omblet, pudden!’ At that time she 
was in the habit of using her own name to express the idea of taking 
posession of something. The menu included pretty well everything that 
must have seemed to her to make up a desirable meal. The fact that 
strawberries appeared in it in two varieties was a demonstration against 
the domestic health regulations. It was based upon the circumstance, 
which she had no doubt observed, that her nurse had attributed her in- 


1 [In the hills just outside Vienna.] 




III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


155 


disposition to a surfeit of strawberries. She was thus retaliating in her 
dream against this unwelcome verdict. 1 

Though we think highly of the happiness of childhood because it is 
still innocent of sexual desires, we should not forget what a fruitful source 
of disappointment and renunciation, and consequently what a stimulus 
to dreaming, may be provided by the other of the two great vital in- 
stincts. 2 Here is another instance of this. My nephew, aged 22 months, 
had been entrusted with the duty of congratulating me on my birthday 
and of presenting me with a basket of cherries, which are still scarcely in 
season at that time of year. He seems to have found the task a hard one, 
for he kept on repeating ‘Chewwies in it’ but could not be induced to 
hand the present over. However, he found a means of compensation. He 
had been in the habit every morning of telling his mother that he had a 
dream of the ‘white soldier’ — a Guards officer in his white cloak whom 
he had once gazed at admiringly in the street. On the day after his birth- 
day sacrifice he awoke with a cheerful piece of news, which could only 
have originated from a dream: ‘Hermann eaten all the chewwies!’ 3 

I do not myself know what animals dream of. But a proverb, to which 
my attention was drawn by one of my students, does claim to know. 


1 The same feat was accomplished shortly afterwards by a dream produced by this 
little girl’s grandmother — their combined ages came to some seventy years. She 
had been obliged to go without food for a whole day on account of a disturbance 
due to a floating kidney. During the following night, no doubt imagining herself 
back in the heyday of her girlhood, she dreamt that she had been ‘asked out’ to 
both of the principal meals and been served at both with the most appetizing 
delicacies. — [The little girl’s dream had been reported to Fliess not long after its 
occurrence (Freud, 1950a, Letter 73 of October 31, 1897).] 

2 [ Footnote added 1911:] A closer study of the mental life of children has taught us, 
to be sure, that sexual instinctual forces, in infantile form, play a large enough part, 
and one that has been too long overlooked, in the psychical activity of children. 
Closer study, too, has given us grounds for feeling some doubt in regard to the hap- 
piness of childhood as it has been constructed by adults in retrospect. Cf. my Three 
Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d). — [The remarkable inconsistency between 
this sentence in the text and several other passages (e.g. on pp. 273 ff. below) is com- 
mented on in the editor’s preface to the last-mentioned work in the seventh volume 
of the Standard Edition.] 

3 [Footnote added 1911:] The fact should be mentioned that children soon begin to 
have more complicated and less transparent dreams, and that, on the other hand, 
adults in certain circumstances often have dreams of a similarly simple, infantile 



156 


III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


character. The wealth of unexpected material that may occur in the dreams of chil- 
dren of four or five is shown by examples in my ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five- 
Year-Old Boy’ (1909^) and in Jung (1910/7 ). — [ Added 1914:] For analytical 
interpretations of children’s dreams see also von Hug-Hellmuth (1911 and 1913), 
Putnam (1912), van Raalte (1912), Spielrein (1913) and Tausk (1913). Children’s 
dreams are also reported by Bianchieri (1912), Busemann (1909 and 1910), 
Doglia and Bianchieri (1910-11) and, in particular, Wiggam (1909), who lays 
stress on their trend towards wish-fulfilment . — [ Added 1911:] On the other hand, 
dreams of an infantile type seem to occur in adults with special frequency when 
they find themselves in unusual external circumstances. Thus Otto Nordenskjold 
(1904, 1, 336 f.) writes as follows of the members of his expedition while they were 
wintering in the Antarctic: ‘The direction taken by our innermost thoughts was 
very clearly shown by our dreams, which were never more vivid or numerous than 
at this time. Even those of us who otherwise dreamt but rarely had long stories to 
tell in the morning when we exchanged our latest experiences in this world of the 
imagination. They were all concerned with the outside world which was now so 
remote from us, though they were often adapted to our actual circumstances. One 
of my companions had a particularly characteristic dream of being back in his 
school class-room, where it was his task to skin miniature seals which had been spe- 
cially prepared for instructional purposes. Eating and drinking, however, were the 
pivot round which our dreams most often revolved. One of us, who had a special 
gift for attending large luncheon parties during the night, was proud if he was able 
to report in the morning that he had “got through a three-course dinner.” Another 
of us dreamt of tobacco, of whole mountains of tobacco; while a third dreamt of a 
ship in full sail coming in across open water. Yet another dream is worth repeating. 
The postman brought round the mail and gave a long explanation of why we had 
had to wait so long for it: he had delivered it at the wrong address and had only 
succeeded in recovering it with great difficulty. We dreamt, of course, of still more 
impossible things. But there was a most striking lack of imaginativeness shown by 
almost all the dreams that I dreamt myself or heard described. It would certainly 
be of great psychological interest if all these dreams could be recorded. And it will 
easily be understood how much we longed for sleep, since it could offer each one 
of us everything that he most eagerly desired.’ [This passage is much abbreviated 
in the English translation of Nordenskjold’s book (1905, 290 ).] — [Added 1914:] 
According to Du Prel (1885, 231), ‘Mungo Park, when he was almost dying of 
thirst on one of his African journeys, dreamt unceasingly of the well-watered valleys 
and meadows of his home. Similarly, Baron Trenck, suffering torments of hunger 
while he was a prisoner in the fortress at Magdeburg, dreamt of being surrounded 
by sumptuous meals; and George Back, who took part in Franklin’s first expedi- 
tion, when he was almost dying of starvation as a result of his fearful privations, 
dreamt constantly and regularly of copious meals.’ 




III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments 


157 


‘What,’ asks the proverb, ‘do geese dream of?’ And it replies: ‘Of maize.’ 1 
The whole theory that dreams are wish-fulfilments is contained in these 
two phrases. 2 

It will be seen that we might have arrived at our theory of the hidden 
meaning of dreams most rapidly merely by following linguistic usage. It 
is true that common language sometimes speaks of dreams with con- 
tempt. (The phrase ‘ Trdume sind Schdume [Dreams are froth] ’ seems in- 
tended to support the scientific estimate of dreams.) But, on the whole, 
ordinary usage treats dreams above all as the blessed fulfillers of wishes. If 
ever we find our expectation surpassed by the event, we exclaim in our de- 
light: ‘1 should never have imagined such a thing even in my wildest 
dreams.’ 3 


1 [ Footnote added 1911:] A Hungarian proverb quoted by Ferenczi [1910] goes 
further and declares that ‘pigs dream of acorns and geese dream of maize.’ — 
[Added 1914:] A Jewish proverb runs: ‘What do hens dream of? — Of millet.’ 
(Bernstein and Segel, 1908, 116.) 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] I am far from seeking to maintain that I am the first 
writer to have had the idea of deriving dreams from wishes. (Cf. the opening 
sentences of my next chapter.) Those who attach any importance to anticipa- 
tions of this kind may go back to classical antiquity and quote Herophilus, a 
physician who lived under the first Ptolemy. According to Buchsenschutz (1868, 
33), he distinguished three sorts of dreams: those which are sent by the gods, 
those which are natural and arise when the mind forms a picture of something 
that is agreeable to it and will come about, and those which are of a mixed na- 
ture and which arise of their own accord from the emergence of pictures in 
which we see what we wish for. J. Starcke (1913, [248]) has drawn attention to 
a dream in Schemer’s collection which that writer himself describes as the fulfil- 
ment of a wish. Schemer (1861, 239) writes: ‘The dreamer’s imagination ful- 
filled her waking wish so promptly, simply because that wish was emotionally 
active in her.’ Schemer classes this dream among 'dreams of mood’; alongside it 
he places ‘dreams of erotic yearning’ in men and women, and ‘dreams of ill- 
temper.’ There is clearly no question of Schemer attributing any more impor- 
tance to wishes in the instigation of dreams than to any other waking mental 
state: still less is there any question of his having related wishes to the essential 
nature of dreaming. 

3 [Children’s dreams (including many of those recorded in this chapter) and 
dreams of an infantile type are discussed in Lecture VIII of Freud’s Introductory 
Lectures (1916-17) and more briefly in Section III of his short study On Dreams 
(190D) (Standard Ed., 5, 643 f.).] 





CHAPTER IV 


DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


If I proceed to put forward the assertion that the meaning of every dream 
is the fulfilment of a wish, that is to say that there cannot be any dreams 
but wishful dreams, I feel certain in advance that I shall meet with the 
most categorical contradiction. 

‘There is nothing new,’ I shall be told, ‘in the idea that some dreams are 
to be regarded as wish-fulfilments; the authorities noticed that fact long 
ago. Cf. Radestock (1879, 137 £), Volkelt (1875, 110 £), Purkinje (1846, 
456), Tissie (1890, 70), Simon (1888, 42, on the hunger dreams of Baron 
Trenck while he was a prisoner), and a passage in Griesinger (1845, 89). 1 
But to assert that there are no dreams other than wish-fulfilment dreams is 
only one more unjustifiable generalization, though fortunately one which 
it is easy to disprove. After all, plenty of dreams occur which contain the 
most distressing subject-matter but never a sign of any wish-fulfilment. Ed- 
uard von Hartmann, the philosopher of pessimism, is probably furthest re- 
moved from the wish-fulfilment theory. In his Philosophie des Unbewussten 
(1890, 2, 344) he writes: “When it comes to dreams, we find all the annoy- 
ances of waking life carried over into the state of sleep; the only thing we 
do not find is what can to some extent reconcile an educated man to life — 
scientific and artistic enjoyment. ...” But even less disgruntled observers 


1 [ Footnote added 1 9 1 4:] A writer as early as Plotinus, the Neo-platonist, is quoted 
by Du Prel (1885, 276) as saying: ‘When our desires are aroused, imagination 
comes along and, as it were, presents us with the objects of those desires.’ [En- 
nead , iv, 4, 17.] 


159 




160 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


have insisted that pain and un-pleasure are more common in dreams than 
pleasure: for instance, Scholz (1893, 57), Volkelt (1875, 80), and others. 
Indeed two ladies, Florence Hallam and Sarah Weed (1896, 499), have ac- 
tually given statistical expression, based on a study of their own dreams, to 
the preponderance of unpleasure in dreaming. They find that 57.2 per cent 
of dreams are “disagreeable” and only 28.6 per cent positively “pleasant.” 
And apart from these dreams, which carry over into sleep the various dis- 
tressing emotions of life, there are anxiety-dreams, in which that most 
dreadful of all unpleasurable feelings holds us in its grasp till we awaken. 
And the commonest victims of these anxiety-dreams are precisely children, 1 
whose dreams you have described as undisguised wish-fulfilments.’ 

It does in fact look as though anxiety-dreams make it impossible to as- 
sert as a general proposition (based on the examples quoted in my last 
chapter) that dreams are wish-fulfilments; indeed they seem to stamp any 
such proposition as an absurdity. 

Nevertheless, there is no great difficulty in meeting these apparently 
conclusive objections. It is only necessary to take notice of the fact that my 
theory is not based on a consideration of the manifest content of dreams 
but refers to the thoughts which are shown by the work of interpretation to 
lie behind dreams. We must make a contrast between the manifest and the 
latent content of dreams. There is no question that there are dreams whose 
manifest content is of the most distressing kind. But has anyone tried to in- 
terpret such dreams? to reveal the latent thoughts behind them? If not, then 
the two objections raised against my theory will not hold water: it still re- 
mains possible that distressing dreams and anxiety-dreams, when they have 
been interpreted, may turn out to be fulfilments of wishes. 2 

When in the course of a piece of scientific work we come upon a prob- 
lem which is difficult to solve, it is often a good plan to take up a second 
problem along with the original one — just as it is easier to crack two nuts 


1 Cf. Debacker (1881) on pavor nocturnus. 

1 [Footnote added 1909:] It is hard to credit the obstinacy with which readers and 
critics of this book shut their eyes to this consideration and overlook the funda- 
mental distinction between the manifest and latent content of dreams . — [Added 
1914:] On the other hand, nothing in the literature of the subject comes so near 
to my hypothesis as a passage in James Sully’s essay ‘The Dream as a Revelation’ 
(1893, 364). The fact that I am only now quoting it for the first time is no sign 
of disparagement: ‘It would seem then, after all, that dreams are not the utter 
nonsense they have been said to be by such authorities as Chaucer, Shakespeare 




IV. Distortion in Dreams 


161 


together than each separately. Thus we are not only faced by the question 
‘How can distressing dreams and anxiety-dreams be wish-fulfilments?’; 
our reflections enable us to add a second question: ‘Why is it that dreams 
with an indifferent content, which turn out to be wish-fulfilments, do not 
express their meaning undisguised?’ Take, for instance, the dream which 
I treated at such length of Irma’s injection. It was not by any means of a 
distressing nature and interpretation showed it as a striking example of 
the fulfilment of a wish. But why should it have needed any interpreta- 
tion at all? Why did it not say what it meant straight out? At first sight 
the dream of Irma’s injection gave no impression that it represented a 
wish of the dreamer’s as fulfilled. My readers will have had no such im- 
pression; but neither did I myself before I carried out the analysis. Let us 
describe this behaviour of dreams, which stands in so much need of ex- 
planation, as ‘the phenomenon of distortion in dreams.’ Thus our second 
problem is: what is the origin of dream-distortion? 

A number of possible solutions of the problem may at once occur to 
us: as, for instance, that some incapacity exists during sleep for giving di- 
rect expression to our dream-thoughts. But the analysis of certain dreams 
forces us to adopt another explanation of distortion in dreams. I will ex- 
emplify this by another dream of my own. Once again this will involve 
me in a variety of indiscretions; but a thorough elucidation of the prob- 
lem will compensate for my personal sacrifice. 

Preamble. — In the spring of 1897 I learnt that two professors at our 
university had recommended me for appointment as professor extraor- 
dinarius} The news surprised and greatly delighted me, since it implied 


and Milton. The chaotic aggregations of our night-fancy have a significance and 
communicate new knowledge. Like some letter in cypher, the dream-inscription 
when scrutinized closely loses its first look of balderdash and takes on the aspect 
of a serious, intelligible message. Or, to vary the figure slightly, we may say that, 
like some palimpsest, the dream discloses beneath its worthless surface-characters 
traces of an old and precious communication.’ [Freud prints the two last sen- 
tences in spaced type.] 

1 [Roughly equivalent to an Assistant Professor. All such appointments in Austria 
were made by the Minister of Education. The fact of this recommendation is re- 
ported by Freud in a letter to Fliess of February 8, 1897 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 
58) and the dream itself is mentioned on March 15, 1897 (ibid., Letter 85). — 
The ‘denominational considerations’ mentioned below relate, of course, to anti- 
Semitic feeling, which was already rife in Vienna during the last years of the 
nineteenth century.] 




162 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


recognition by two eminent men, which could not be put down to any 
considerations of a personal kind. But I at once warned myself not to at- 
tach any expectations to the event. During the last few years the Ministry 
had disregarded recommendations of that sort; and several of my col- 
leagues who were my seniors in age and at least my equals in merit had 
been waiting vainly for appointment. I had no reason to believe that I 
should be more fortunate. I therefore determined to meet the future with 
resignation. So far as I knew, I was not an ambitious man; I was following 
my profession with gratifying success even without the advantages af- 
forded by a title. Moreover there was no question of my pronouncing the 
grapes sweet or sour: they hung far too high over my head. 

One evening I had a visit from a friend — one of the men whose exam- 
ple I had taken as a warning to me. For a considerable time he had been 
a candidate for promotion to a professorship, a rank which in our society 
turns its holder into a demi-god to his patients. Less resigned than I was, 
however, he was in the habit of paying his respects from time to time in 
the offices of the Ministry with a view to advancing his prospects. He had 
been paying one of these visits just before calling on me. He told me that 
on this occasion he had driven the exalted official into a corner and had 
asked straight out whether the delay over his appointment was not in fact 
due to denominational considerations. The reply had been that, in view 
of the present state of feeling, it was no doubt true that, for the moment, 
His Excellency was not in a position, etc., etc. ‘At least I know where I 
am now,’ my friend had concluded. It was not news to me, though it was 
bound to strengthen my feeling of resignation; for the same denomina- 
tional considerations applied to my own case. 

On the morning after this visit I had the following dream, which 
was remarkable among other things for its form. It consisted of two 
thoughts and two pictures — each thought being succeeded by a picture. 
I shall, however, report only the first half of the dream here, since the 
other half has no connection with the purpose for which I am describing 
the dream. 

I. . . . My friend R. ivas my uncle . — / had a great feeling of 
affection for him. 

II. I saiv before me his face, someivhat changed. It was as 
though it had been drawn out lengtlnvays. A yellow beard that 
surrounded it stood out especially clearly. 



IV. Distortion in Dreams 


163 


Then followed the two other pieces which I shall pass over — once 
more a thought followed by a picture. 

The interpretation of the dream took place as follows. 

When, during the course of the morning, the dream came into my 
head, I laughed aloud and said: ‘The dream’s nonsense!’ But it refused to 
go away and followed me about all day, till at last in the evening I began 
to reproach myself: ‘If one of your patients who was interpreting a dream 
could find nothing better to say than that it was nonsense, you would 
take him up about it and suspect that the dream had some disagreeable 
story at the back of it which he wanted to avoid becoming aware of. Treat 
yourself in the same way. Your opinion that the dream is nonsense only 
means that you have an internal resistance against interpreting it. Don’t 
let yourself be put off like this.’ So I set about the interpretation. 

‘R. was my uncle.' What could that mean? I never had more than one 
uncle — Uncle Josef . 1 There was an unhappy story attached to him. 
Once — more than thirty years ago — in his eagerness to make money, he 
allowed himself to be involved in a transaction of a kind that is severely 
punished by the law, and he was in fact punished for it. My father, whose 
hair turned grey from grief in a few days, used always to say that Uncle 
Josef was not a bad man but only a simpleton; those were his words. So 
that if my friend R. was my Uncle Josef, what I was meaning to say was 
that R. was a simpleton. Hardly credible and most disagreeable! — But 
there was the face which I saw in the dream with its elongated features 
and yellow beard. My uncle did in fact have a face like that, elongated 
and framed in a handsome fair beard. My friend R. had originally been 
extremely dark; but when black-haired people begin to turn grey they 
pay for the splendour of their youth. Hair by hair, their black beards 
go through an unpleasing change of colour: first they turn to a reddish 
brown, then to a yellowish brown, and only then to a definite grey. My 
friend R.’s beard was at that time passing through this stage — and so, in- 
cidentally, was my own, as I had noticed with dissatisfaction. The face 


1 It is astonishing to observe the way in which my memory — my waking memory — 
was narrowed at this point, for the purposes of the analysis. Actually I have known 
five of my uncles, and loved and honoured one of them. But at the moment at 
which I overcame my resistance to interpreting the dream I said to myself that I 
never had more than one uncle — the one that was intended in the dream. 



164 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


that I saw in the dream was at once my friend R.’s and my uncle’s. It was 
like one of Gabon’s composite photographs. (In order to bring out family 
likenesses, Gabon used to photograph several faces on the same plate 
[1907, 6 ff. and 221 ff.].) So there could be no doubt that 1 really did 
mean that my friend R. was a simpleton — like my Uncle Josef. 

I still had no idea at all what could be the purpose of this comparison, 
against which I continued to struggle. It did not go very deep, after all, 
since my uncle was a criminal, whereas my friend R. bore an unblemished 
character . . . except for having been fined for knocking a boy down with 
his bicycle. Could I have had that crime in mind? That would have been 
making fun of the comparison. At this point I remembered another con- 
versation which I had had a few days earlier with another colleague, N., 
and, now I came to think of it, upon the same subject. I had met N. in 
the street. He too had been recommended for a professorship. He had 
heard of the honour that had been paid me and had offered me his con- 
gratulations on it; but I had unhesitatingly refused to accept them. ‘You 
are the last person,’ I had said, ‘to make that kind of joke; you know what 
such a recommendation is worth from your own experience.’ ‘Who can 
say?’ he had answered — jokingly, it seemed; ‘there was something definite 
against me. Don’t you know that a woman once started legal proceedings 
against me? I needn’t assure you that the case was dismissed. It was a dis- 
graceful attempt at blackmail; and I had the greatest difficulty in saving 
the prosecutrix from being punished. But perhaps they may be using this 
at the Ministry as an excuse for not appointing me. But you have an un- 
blemished character.’ This told me who the criminal was, and at the same 
time showed me how the dream was to be interpreted and what its pur- 
pose was. My Uncle Josef represented my two colleagues who had not 
been appointed to professorships — the one as a simpleton and the other 
as a criminal. I now saw too why they were represented in this light. If the 
appointment of my friends R. and N. had been postponed for ‘denomi- 
national’ reasons, my own appointment was also open to doubt; if, how- 
ever, I could attribute the rejection of my two friends to other reasons, 
which did not apply to me, my hopes would remain untouched. This was 
the procedure adopted by my dream: it made one of them, R., into a sim- 
pleton and the other, N., into a criminal, whereas / was neither the one 
nor the other; thus we no longer had anything in common; I could re- 
joice at my appointment to a professorship, and I could avoid drawing 
the distressing conclusion that R.’s report of what the high official had 
said to him must apply equally to me. 



IV. Distortion in Dreams 


165 


But I felt obliged to proceed still further with my interpretation of the 
dream; I felt I had not yet finished dealing with it satisfactorily. I was still 
uneasy over the light-heartedness with which I had degraded two of my re- 
spected colleagues in order to keep open my own path to a professorship. 
My dissatisfaction with my conduct, however, had diminished since I had 
come to realize the worth that was to be attached to expressions in dreams. 
I was prepared to deny through thick and thin that I really considered that 
R. was a simpleton and that I really disbelieved N.’s account of the black- 
mailing affair. Nor did I believe that Irma was really made dangerously ill 
through being injected with Otto’s preparation of propyl. In both these 
cases what my dreams had expressed was only my wish that it might be so. 
The assertion in which my wish was realized sounded less absurd in the later 
dream than in the earlier one; it made cleverer use of the actual facts in its 
construction, like a well-designed slander of the kind that makes people feel 
that ‘there’s something in it.’ For one of the professors in his own faculty 
had voted against my friend R., and my friend N. had himself innocently 
provided me with the material for my aspersions. Nevertheless, I must re- 
peat, the dream seemed to me to stand in need of further elucidation. 

I then recalled that there was still a piece of the dream which the inter- 
pretation had not touched. After the idea had occurred to me that R. was 
my uncle, I had had a warm feeling of affection for him in the dream. 
Where did that feeling belong? 1 had naturally never had any feeling of 
affection for my Uncle Josef. I had been fond of my friend R. and had es- 
teemed him for many years; but if I had gone up to him and expressed my 
sentiments in terms approaching the degree of affection I had felt in the 
dream, there could be no doubt that he would have been astonished. My 
affection for him struck me as ungenuine and exaggerated — like the judge- 
ment of his intellectual qualities which I had expressed by fusing his per- 
sonality with my uncle’s, though there the exaggeration had been in the 
opposite direction. But a new light began to dawn on me. The affection in 
the dream did not belong to the latent content, to the thoughts that lay be- 
hind the dream; it stood in contradiction to them and was calculated to 
conceal the true interpretation of the dream. And probably that was pre- 
cisely its raison d’etre. I recalled my resistance against embarking on the in- 
terpretation, how long I had put it off and how I had declared that the 
dream was sheer nonsense. My psycho-analytic treatments taught me how 
a repudiation of that kind was to be interpreted: it had no value as a judge- 
ment but was simply an expression of emotion. If my little daughter did 
not want an apple that was offered to her, she asserted that the apple tasted 



166 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


sour without having tasted it. And if my patients behaved like the child, I 
knew that they were concerned with an idea which they wanted to repress. 
The same was true of my dream. I did not want to interpret it, because the 
interpretation contained something that I was struggling against. When I 
had completed the interpretation I learnt what it was that I had been strug- 
gling against — namely, the assertion that R. was a simpleton. The affection 
that I felt for R. could not be derived from the latent dream-thoughts; but 
no doubt it originated from this struggle of mine. If my dream was dis- 
torted in this respect from its latent content — and distorted into its oppo- 
site — then the affection that was manifest in the dream served the purpose 
of this distortion. In other words, distortion was shown in this case to be 
deliberate and to be a means of dissimulation. My dream-thoughts had con- 
tained a slander against R.; and, in order that I might not notice this, what 
appeared in the dream was the opposite, a feeling of affection for him. 

It seemed as though this might be a discovery of general validity. It is 
true that, as was shown by the instances quoted in Chapter III, there are 
some dreams which are undisguised fulfilments of wishes. But in cases 
where the wish-fulfilment is unrecognizable, where it has been disguised, 
there must have existed some inclination to put up a defence against the 
wish; and owing to this defence the wish was unable to express itself except 
in a distorted shape. I will try to seek a social parallel to this internal event 
in the mind. Where can we find a similar distortion of a psychical act in 
social life? Only where two persons are concerned, one of whom possesses 
a certain degree of power which the second is obliged to take into account. 
In such a case the second person will distort his psychical acts or, as we 
might put it, will dissimulate. The politeness which I practise every day is 
to a large extent dissimulation of this kind; and when I interpret my 
dreams for my readers I am obliged to adopt similar distortions. The poet 
complains of the need for these distortions in the words; 

Das Beste, was du wissen kannst, 

Darfst du den Buben doch nicht sagen. 1 


1 [Mephistopheles, in Goethe’s Faust , Part I [Scene 4]: ‘After all, the best of what 
you know may not be told to boys.’ — These were favourite lines of Freud’s. He 
uses them again on p. 46 1 below. He had already quoted them in letters to Fliess 
of December 3, 1897, and February 9, 1898 (Freud, 1950*?, Letters 77 and 83); 
and, towards the end of his life, on the occasion of his reception of the Goethe 
prize in 1930, he applied them to Goethe himself. (Freud, 1930f.)] 




IV. Distortion in Dreams 


167 


A similar difficulty confronts the political writer who has disagreeable 
truths to tell to those in authority. If he presents them undisguised, the 
authorities will suppress his words — after they have been spoken, if his 
pronouncement was an oral one, but beforehand, if he had intended to 
make it in print. A writer must beware of the censorship , 1 and on its ac- 
count he must soften and distort the expression of his opinion. According 
to the strength and sensitiveness of the censorship he finds himself com- 
pelled either merely to refrain from certain forms of attack, or to speak in 
allusions in place of direct references, or he must conceal his objection- 
able pronouncement beneath some apparently innocent disguise: for in- 
stance, he may describe a dispute between two Mandarins in the Middle 
Kingdom, when the people he really has in mind are officials in his own 
country. The stricter the censorship, the more far-reaching will be the dis- 
guise and the more ingenious too may be the means employed for putting 
the reader on the scent of the true meaning . 2 


1 [This analogy, which makes its first appearance in this passage in connection 
with dreams, had already been used in connection with paranoia at the end of 
Freud’s second paper on the neuropsychoses of defence (18966) and more 
generally in Section 2 of his chapter on psychotherapy in Studies on Hysteria 
(Breuer and Freud, 1895).] 

2 [ Footnote added 1919:] Frau Dr. H. von Hug-Hellmuh (1915) has recorded a 
dream which is perhaps better fitted than any to justify my choice of nomencla- 
ture. In this example the dream-distortion adopted the same methods as the postal 
censorship for expunging passages which were objectionable to it. The postal cen- 
sorship makes such passages unreadable by blacking them out; the dream censor- 
ship replaced them by an incomprehensible mumble. 

In order to make the dream intelligible, I must explain that the dreamer, a 
cultivated and highly esteemed lady, was fifty years of age. She was the widow of 
an officer of high rank who had died some twelve years previously and was the 
mother of grown sons, one of whom was in the field at the time of the dream. 

Here then is the dream — which deals with ‘love services’ in wartime. \^Liebes- 
dienste’ means in the first instance ‘services performed for love,’ i.e. ‘unremuner- 
ated services’; but the term obviously courts another interpretation.] ‘The patient 
went to Garrison Hospital No. 1 and informed the sentry at the gate that she 
must speak to the Chief Medical Officer (mentioning a name that was unknown 
to her) as she wanted to volunteer for service at the hospital. She pronounced the 
word “service” in such a way that the N.C.O. at once understood that she meant 
“love service.” Since she was an elderly lady, after some hesitation he allowed her 
to pass. Instead of finding the Chief Medical Officer, however, she reached a large 
and gloomy apartment in which a number of officers and army doctors were 




168 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


The fact that the phenomena of censorship and of dream-distortion cor- 
respond down to their smallest details justifies us in presuming that they are 
similarly determined. We may therefore suppose that dreams are given their 
shape in individual human beings by the operation of two psychical forces 
(or we may describe them as currents or systems); and that one of these 
forces constructs the wish which is expressed by the dream, while the other 
exercises a censorship upon this dream-wish and, by the use of that censor- 
ship, forcibly brings about a distortion in the expression of the wish. It re- 
mains to enquire as to the nature of the power enjoyed by this second 
agency which enables it to exercise its censorship. When we bear in mind 
that the latent dream-thoughts are not conscious before an analysis has 


standing and sitting round a long table. She approached a staff surgeon with her 
request, and he understood her meaning after she had said only a few words. The 
actual wording of her speech in the dream was: “I and many other women and 
girls in Vienna are ready to . . .” at this point in the dream her words turned into 
a mumble “. . . for the troops — officers and other ranks without distinction.” She 
could tell from the expressions on the officers’ faces, partly embarrassed and 
partly sly, that everyone had understood her meaning correctly. The lady went 
on: “I’m aware that our decision must sound surprising, but we mean it in bitter 
earnest. No one asks a soldier in the field whether he wishes to die or not.” There 
followed an awkward silence of some minutes. The staff surgeon then put his 
arm round her waist and said: “Suppose, madam, it actually came to . . . (mum- 
ble).” She drew away from him, thinking to herself: “He’s like all the rest of 
them,” and replied: “Good gracious, I’m an old woman and I might never come 
to that. Besides, there’s one condition that must be observed: age must be re- 
spected. It must never happen that an elderly woman . . . (mumble) ... a mere 
boy. That would be terrible.” “I understand perfectly,” replied the staff surgeon. 
Some of the officers, and among them one who had been a suitor of hers in her 
youth, laughed out loud. The lady then asked to be taken to the Chief Medical 
Officer, with whom she was acquainted, so that the whole matter could be 
thrashed out; but she found, to her consternation, that she could not recall his 
name. Nevertheless, the staff surgeon, most politely and respectfully, showed her 
the way up to the second floor by a very narrow, iron, spiral staircase, which led 
directly from the room to the upper storeys of the building. As she went up she 
heard an officer say: “That’s a tremendous decision to make — no matter whether 
a woman’s young or old! Splendid of her!” Feeling simply that she was doing her 
duty, she walked up an interminable staircase. — The dream was repeated twice 
in the course of a few weeks, with, as the lady remarked, some quite unimportant 
and meaningless modifications.’ 

[Some further comments on this dream will be found in Freud’s Introductory 
Lectures (1916-17), Lecture IX.] 




IV. Distortion in Dreams 


169 


been carried out, whereas the manifest content of the dream is consciously 
remembered, it seems plausible to suppose that the privilege enjoyed by the 
second agency is that of permitting thoughts to enter consciousness. Noth- 
ing, it would seem, can reach consciousness from the first system without 
passing the second agency; and the second agency allows nothing to pass 
without exercising its rights and making such modifications as it thinks fit 
in the thought which is seeking admission to consciousness. Incidentally, 
this enables us to form a quite definite view of the ‘essential nature’ of con- 
sciousness: we see the process of a thing becoming conscious as a specific 
psychical act, distinct from and independent of the process of the formation 
of a presentation or idea; and we regard consciousness as a sense organ 
which perceives data that arise elsewhere. It can be demonstrated that these 
basic assumptions are absolutely indispensable to psychopathology. We 
must, however, postpone our further consideration of them to a later stage. 
[See Chapter VII, particularly Section F, pp. 605 ff. ] 

If this picture of the two psychical agencies and their relation to con- 
sciousness is accepted, there is a complete analogy in political life to the 
extraordinary affection which I felt in my dream for my friend R., who 
was treated with such contumely during the dream’s interpretation. Let us 
imagine a society in which a struggle is in process between a ruler who is 
jealous of his power and an alert public opinion. The people are in revolt 
against an unpopular official and demand his dismissal. But the autocrat, 
to show that he need take no heed of the popular wish, chooses that mo- 
ment for bestowing a high distinction upon the official, though there is no 
other reason for doing so. In just the same way my second agency, which 
commands the approaches to consciousness, distinguished my friend R. by 
a display of excessive affection simply because the wishful impulses belong- 
ing to the first system, for particular reasons of their own on which they 
were intent at the moment, chose to condemn him as a simpleton. 1 

These considerations may lead us to feel that the interpretation of 
dreams may enable us to draw conclusions as to the structure of our mental 


1 [The analysis of this dream is continued on pp. 213 ff . — Footnote added 1911:] 
Hypocritical dreams of this description are not uncommon events in my own 
case or in that of other people. [They are further discussed below, pp. 477 ff.] 
While I was engaged in working out a certain scientific problem, I was troubled 
for several nights in close succession by a somewhat confusing dream which had 
as its subject a reconciliation with a friend whom I had dropped many years be- 
fore. On the fourth or fifth occasion I at last succeeded in understanding the 




170 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


apparatus which we have hoped for in vain from philosophy. I do not pro- 
pose, however, to follow this line of thought [which is taken up in Chapter 
VII] ; but, having cleared up the matter of distortion in dreams, I shall go 
back to the problem from which we started. The question raised was how 
dreams with a distressing content can be resolved into wish-fulfilments. We 
now see that this is possible if dream-distortion has occurred and if the dis- 
tressing content serves only to disguise something that is wished for. Bearing 
in mind our assumption of the existence of two psychical agencies, we can 
further say that distressing dreams do in fact contain something which is dis- 
tressing to the second agency, but something which at the same time fulfils a 
wish on the part of the first agency. They are wishful dreams in so far as every 
dream arises from the first agency; the relation of the second agency towards 
dreams is of a defensive and not of a creative kind. 1 If we were to restrict our- 
selves to considering what the second agency contributes to dreams, we 
could never arrive at an understanding of them: all the conundrums which 
the authorities have observed in dreams would remain unsolved. 

The fact that dreams really have a secret meaning which represents the 
fulfilment of a wish must be proved afresh in each particular case by 
analysis. I shall therefore select a few dreams with a distressing content 
and attempt to analyse them. Some of them are the dreams of hysterical 
patients which require lengthy preambles and an occasional excursus into 
the psychical processes characteristic of hysteria. But I cannot escape this 
aggravation of the difficulties of presenting my argument. [See p. 128.] 

As I have already explained [pp. 125 £], when I undertake the analytic 
treatment of a psychoneurotic patient his dreams are invariably discussed 
between us. In the course of these discussions I am obliged to give him 


meaning of the dream. It was an incitement to abandon my last remnants of 
consideration for the person in question and to free myself from him completely, 
and it had been hypocritically disguised as its opposite. [Cf. p. 482.] I have re- 
ported elsewhere [1910/, reprinted below, p. 408 n.\ a ‘hypocritical Oedipus 
dream,’ dreamt by a man, in which the hostile impulses and death-wishes con- 
tained in the dream-thoughts were replaced by manifest affection. Another kind 
of hypocritical dream will be mentioned below in Chapter VI [pp. 479 ff.] . [The 
friend referred to in this footnote was evidently Fliess. Cf. Section IV of Kris’s 
introduction to Freud’s correspondence with Fliess (Freud, 1950a).] 

1 [ Footnote added 1930:] Later [pp. 482 n. and 558 ff.] we shall also come across 
instances in which, on the contrary, a dream expresses a wish on the part of the 
second agency. 




IV. Distortion in Dreams 


171 


all the psychological explanations which have enabled me myself to reach 
an understanding of his symptoms. I am thereupon subjected to a re- 
morseless criticism, certainly no less severe than I have to expect from the 
members of my own profession. And my patients invariably contradict 
my assertion that all dreams are fulfilments of wishes. Here, then, are 
some instances from the material of dreams that have been brought up 
against me as evidence to the contrary. 

‘You’re always saying to me,’ began a clever woman patient of mine, 
‘that a dream is a fulfilled wish. Well, I’ll tell you a dream whose subject 
was the exact opposite — a dream in which one of my wishes was not ful- 
filled. How do you fit that in with your theory? This was the dream: 

'/ ivanted to give a supper-party, but I had nothing in the house but a little 
smoked salmon. I thought I would go out and buy something, but remem- 
bered then that it was Sunday afternoon and all the shops would be shut. 
Next I tried to ring up some caterers, but the telephone was out of order. So I 
had to abandon my wish to give a supper-party l 

I answered, of course, that analysis was the only way of deciding on 
the meaning of the dream; though I admitted that at first sight it seemed 
sensible and coherent and looked like the reverse of a wish-fulfilment. 
‘But what material did the dream arise from? As you know, the instigation 
to a dream is always to be found in the events of the previous day.’ 

Analysis. — My patient’s husband, an honest and capable wholesale 
butcher, had remarked to her the day before that he was getting too stout 
and therefore intended to start on a course of weight-reduction. He pro- 
posed to rise early, do physical exercises, keep to a strict diet, and above all 
accept no more invitations to supper. — She laughingly added that her hus- 
band, at the place where he regularly lunched, had made the acquaintance 
of a painter, who had pressed him to be allowed to paint his portrait, as he 
had never seen such expressive features. Her husband however had replied 
in his blunt manner that he was much obliged, but he was sure the painter 
would prefer a piece of a pretty young girl’s behind to the whole of his face . 1 


1 Cf. the phrase ‘sitting for one’s portrait’ and Goethe’s lines: 

Und wenn er keinen Hintern hat, 

Wie mag der Edle sitzen? 

[And if he hasn’t a behind, 

How can his Lordship sit? 

(From ‘Totalitat,’ 1814-15.)] 




172 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


She was very much in love with her husband now and teased him a lot. She 
had begged him, too, not to give her any caviare. 

I asked her what that meant; and she explained that she had wished 
for a long time that she could have a caviare sandwich every morning but 
had grudged the expense. Of course her husband would have let her have 
it at once if she had asked him. But, on the contrary, she had asked him 
not to give her any caviare, so that she could go on teasing him about it. 

This explanation struck me as unconvincing. Inadequate reasons 
like this usually conceal unconfessed motives. They remind one of 
Bernheim’s hypnotized patients. When one of these carries out a post- 
hypnotic suggestion and is asked why he is acting in this way, instead of 
saying that he has no idea, he feels compelled to invent some obviously 
unsatisfactory reason. The same was no doubt true of my patient and the 
caviare. I saw that she was obliged to create an unfulfilled wish for herself 
in her actual life; and the dream represented this renunciation as having 
been put into effect. But why was it that she stood in need of an unful- 
filled wish? 

The associations which she had so far produced had not been suffi- 
cient to interpret the dream. I pressed her for some more. After a short 
pause, such as would correspond to the overcoming of a resistance, she 
went on to tell me that the day before she had visited a woman friend of 
whom she confessed she felt jealous because her (my patient’s) husband 
was constantly singing her praises. Fortunately this friend of hers is very 
skinny and thin and her husband admires a plumper figure. I asked her 
what she had talked about to her thin friend. Naturally, she replied, of 
that lady’s wish to grow a little stouter. Her friend had enquired, too: 
When are you going to ask us to another meal? You always feed one 
so well.’ 

The meaning of the dream was now clear, and I was able to say to my 
patient: ‘It is just as though when she made this suggestion you said to 
yourself: “A likely thing! I’m to ask you to come and eat in my house so 
that you may get stout and attract my husband still more! I’d rather never 
give another supper-party.” What the dream was saying to you was that 
you were unable to give any supper-parties, and it was thus fulfilling your 
wish not to help your friend to grow plumper. The fact that what people 
eat at parties makes them stout had been brought home to you by your 
husband’s decision not to accept any more invitations to supper in the in- 
terests of his plan to reduce his weight.’ All that was now lacking was 



IV. Distortion in Dreams 


173 


some coincidence to confirm the solution. The smoked salmon in the 
dream had not yet been accounted for. ‘How,’ I asked, ‘did you arrive at 
the salmon that came into your dream?’ ‘Oh,’ she replied, ‘smoked 
salmon is my friend’s favourite dish.’ I happen to be acquainted with the 
lady in question myself, and I can confirm the fact that she grudges her- 
self salmon no less than my patient grudges herself caviare. 

The same dream admits of another and subtler interpretation, which 
in fact becomes unavoidable if we take a subsidiary detail into account. 
(The two interpretations are not mutually contradictory, but both cover 
the same ground; they are a good instance of the fact that dreams, like 
all other psychopathological structures, regularly have more than one 
meaning.) My patient, it will be remembered, at the same time as she was 
occupied with her dream of the renunciation of a wish, was also trying 
to bring about a renounced wish (for the caviare sandwich) in real life. 
Her friend had also given expression to a wish — to become stouter — and 
it would not have been surprising if my patient had dreamt that her 
friend’s wish was unfulfilled; for my patient’s own wish was that her 
friend’s wish (to put on weight) should not be fulfilled. But instead of this 
she dreamt that one of her own wishes was not fulfilled. Thus the dream 
will acquire a new interpretation if we suppose that the person indicated 
in the dream was not herself but her friend, that she had put herself in 
her friend’s place, or, as we might say, that she had ‘identified’ herself with 
her friend. I believe she had in fact done this; and the circumstance of her 
having brought about a renounced wish in real life was evidence of this 
identification. 

What is the meaning of hysterical identification? It requires a some- 
what lengthy explanation. Identification is a highly important factor in 
the mechanism of hysterical symptoms. It enables patients to express in 
their symptoms not only their own experiences but those of a large num- 
ber of other people; it enables them, as it were, to suffer on behalf of a 
whole crowd of people and to act all the parts in a play single-handed. I 
shall be told that this is not more than the familiar hysterical imitation, 
the capacity of hysterics to imitate any symptoms in other people that 
may have struck their attention — sympathy, as it were, intensified to the 
point of reproduction. This, however, does no more than show us the 
path along which the psychical process in hysterical imitation proceeds. 
The path is something different from the mental act which proceeds 
along it. The latter is a little more complicated than the common picture 



174 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


of hysterical imitation; it consists in the unconscious drawing of an infer- 
ence, as an example will make clear. Supposing a physician is treating a 
woman patient, who is subject to a particular kind of spasm, in a hospital 
ward among a number of other patients. He will show no surprise if he 
finds one morning that this particular kind of hysterical attack has found 
imitators. He will merely say: ‘The other patients have seen it and copied 
it; it’s a case of psychical infection.’ That is true; but the psychical infec- 
tion has occurred along some such lines as these. As a rule, patients know 
more about one another than the doctor does about any of them; and af- 
ter the doctor’s visit is over they turn their attention to one another. Let 
us imagine that this patient had her attack on a particular day; then the 
others will quickly discover that it was caused by a letter from home, the 
revival of some unhappy love-affair, or some such thing. Their sympathy 
is aroused and they draw the following inference, though it fails to pene- 
trate into consciousness: ‘If a cause like this can produce an attack like 
this, I may have the same kind of attack since I have the same grounds for 
having it.’ If this inference were capable of entering consciousness, it 
might possibly give rise to a fear of having the same kind of attack. But 
in fact the inference is made in a different psychical region, and conse- 
quently results in the actual realization of the dreaded symptom. Thus 
identification is not simple imitation but assimilation on the basis of a 
similar aetiological pretension; it expresses a resemblance and is derived 
from a common element which remains in the unconscious. 

Identification is most frequently used in hysteria to express a common 
sexual element. A hysterical woman identifies herself in her symptoms 
most readily — though not exclusively — with people with whom she has 
had sexual relations or with people who have had sexual relations with the 
same people as herself. Linguistic usage takes this into account, for two 
lovers are spoken of as being ‘one.’ In hysterical phantasies, just as in 
dreams, it is enough for purposes of identification that the subject should 
have thoughts of sexual relations without their having necessarily taken 
place in reality. Thus the patient whose dream I have been discussing was 
merely following the rules of hysterical processes of thought in expressing 
her jealousy of her friend (which incidentally she herself knew was unjus- 
tified) by taking her place in the dream and identifying herself with her 
by creating a symptom — the renounced wish. The process might be ex- 
pressed verbally thus: my patient put herself in her friend’s place in the 
dream because her friend was taking my patient’s place with her husband 



IV. Distortion in Dreams 


175 


and because she (my patient) wanted to take her friend’s place in her hus- 
band’s high opinion . 1 

A contradiction to my theory of dreams produced by another of my 
women patients (the cleverest of all my dreamers) was resolved more 
simply, but upon the same pattern: namely that the non-fulfilment of one 
wish meant the fulfilment of another. One day I had been explaining to 
her that dreams are fulfilments of wishes. Next day she brought me a 
dream in which she was travelling down with her mother-in-law to the 
place in the country where they were to spend their holidays together. 
Now I knew that she had violently rebelled against the idea of spending 
the summer near her mother-in-law and that a few days earlier she had 
successfully avoided the propinquity she dreaded by engaging rooms in a 
far distant resort. And now her dream had undone the solution she had 
wished for: was not this the sharpest possible contradiction of my theory 
that in dreams wishes are fulfilled? No doubt; and it was only necessary to 
follow the dream’s logical consequence in order to arrive at its interpreta- 
tion. The dream showed that I was wrong. Thus it was her wish that I 
might be wrong, and her dream showed that ivish fulfilled. But her wish that 
I might be wrong, which was fulfilled in connection with her summer hol- 
idays, related in fact to another and more serious matter. For at about the 
same time I had inferred from the material produced in her analysis that 
at a particular period of her life something must have occurred that was of 
importance in determining her illness. She had disputed this, since she had 
no recollection of it; but soon afterwards it had turned out that I was right. 


1 1 myself regret the insertion into my argument of excerpts from the psycho- 
pathology of hysteria. [See p. 128 fi] Their fragmentary presentation and de- 
tachment from their context cannot fail to detract from their enlightening effect. 
If, however, they serve to indicate the intimate connection between the topic of 
dreams and that of the psychoneuroses, they will have fulfilled the purpose for 
which they are inserted. — [This is Freud’s first published discussion of identifi- 
cation, though he had referred to it earlier, in his correspondence with Fliess (e.g. 
in Letter 58 of February 8, 1897, and Manuscript L of May 2, 1897). Though 
he touched upon the subject here and there in later publications, his first lengthy 
consideration of it after the present one was more than twenty years later — in 
Chapter VII of Group Psychology (Freud, 1921c). The different topic of identifi- 
cation as part of the dream-work is discussed below on pp. 336 £] 




176 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


Thus her wish that I might be wrong, which was transformed into her 
dream of spending her holidays with her mother-in-law, corresponded to 
a well-justified wish that the events of which she was then becoming aware 
for the first time might never have occurred. 

I have ventured to interpret — without any analysis, but only by a 
guess — a small episode which occurred to a friend of mine who was in the 
same class as I was all through our career at a secondary school. One day he 
listened to a lecture which I gave before a small audience on the novel idea 
that dreams were wish-fulfilments. He went home and dreamt that he had 
lost all his cases (he was a barrister) and afterwards arraigned me on the sub- 
ject. I evaded the issue by telling him that after all one can’t win all one’s 
cases. But to myself I thought: ‘Considering that for eight whole years I sat 
on the front bench as top of the class while he drifted about somewhere in 
the middle, he can hardly fail to nourish a wish, left over from his school- 
days, that some day or other / may come a complete cropper.’ 

A dream of a gloomier kind was also brought up against me by a pa- 
tient as an objection to the theory of wishful dreams. 

The patient, who was a young girl, began thus: ‘As you will remember, 
my sister has only one boy left now — Karl; she lost his elder brother, 
Otto, while I was still living with her. Otto was my favourite; I more or 
less brought him up. I’m fond of the little one too, but of course not 
nearly so fond as I was of the one who died. Last night, then, 1 dreamt 
that I saw Karl lying before me dead. He was lying in his little coffin with his 
hands folded and with candles all round — in fact just like little Otto, whose 
death was such a blow to me. Now tell me, what can that mean? You know 
me. Am I such a wicked person that I can wish my sister to lose the one 
child she still has? Or does the dream mean that I would rather Karl were 
dead than Otto whom I was so much fonder of?’ 

I assured her that this last interpretation was out of the question. And 
after reflecting a little I was able to give her the correct interpretation of 
the dream, which she afterwards confirmed. I was able to do so because I 
was familiar with the whole of the dreamer’s previous history. 

The girl had early been left: an orphan and had been brought up in the 
house of a much older sister. Among the friends who visited at the house 
was a man who made a lasting impression on her heart. For a time it had 
seemed as though her scarcely acknowledged relations with him would lead 
to marriage; but this happy outcome was brought to nothing by her sister, 



IV. Distortion in Dreams 


177 


whose motives were never fully explained. After the breach the man ceased 
to visit the house; and shortly after the death of little Otto, on to whom she 
had meanwhile turned her affection, my patient herself set up on her own. 
She did not succeed, however, in freeing herself from her attachment to her 
sister’s friend. Her pride bade her avoid him; but she was unable to transfer 
her love to any of the other admirers who presented themselves later. When- 
ever it was announced that the object of her affections, who was by profes- 
sion a literary man, was to give a lecture anywhere, she was invariably in the 
audience; and she took every possible opportunity of seeing him from a dis- 
tance on neutral ground. I remembered that she had told me the day before 
that the Professor was going to a particular concert and that she intended 
to go to it as well so as to enjoy a glimpse of him once more. That had been 
on the day before the dream, and the concert was to take place on the day 
on which she told me the dream. It was therefore easy for me to construct 
the correct interpretation, and I asked her whether she could think of any- 
thing that happened after little Otto’s death. She answered at once: ‘Of 
course; the Professor came to see us again after a long absence, and I saw 
him once more beside little Otto’s coffin.’ This was exactly what I had ex- 
pected, and I interpreted the dream in this way: ‘If now the other boy were 
to die, the same thing would happen. You would spend the day with your 
sister and the Professor would be certain to come to offer his condolences, 
so that you would see him again under the same conditions as the other 
time. The dream means no more than your wish to see him once more, a 
wish which you are inwardly struggling against. I know you have a ticket 
for today’s concert in your pocket. Your dream was a dream of impatience: 
it anticipated the glimpse you are to have of him today by a few hours.’ 

In order to conceal her wish, she had evidently chosen a situation in 
which such wishes are usually suppressed, a situation in which one is so 
much filled with grief that one has no thought of love. Yet it is quite pos- 
sible that even in the real situation of which the dream was an exact 
replica, beside the coffin of the elder boy whom she had loved still more, 
she may have been unable to suppress her tender feelings for the visitor 
who had been absent so long . 1 

A similar dream of another woman patient had a different explanation. 
When she was young she had been remarkable for her ready wit and 


1 [This dream is referred to again on pp. 266 f. and 469; it is also briefly recorded 
in Section IX of Freud, 190D (Standard Ed., 5, 675).] 




178 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


cheerful disposition; and these characteristics were still to be seen, at all 
events in the ideas that occurred to her during the treatment. In the course 
of a longish dream, this lady imagined that she saw her only, fifteen-year- 
old daughter lying dead ‘in a case.’ She had half a mind to use the scene 
as an objection to the wish-fulfilment theory, though she herself suspected 
that the detail of the ‘case’ must point the way to another view of the 
dream. 1 In the course of the analysis she recalled that at a party the 
evening before there had been some talk about the English word ‘box’ and 
the various ways in which it could be translated into German — such as 
‘ Schachtel’ [‘case’], ‘ Loge [‘box at the theatre’], ‘ Kasteri [‘chest’], ‘ Ohrfeige 
[‘box on the ear’], and so on. Other portions of the same dream enabled 
us to discover further that she had guessed that the English ‘box’ was re- 
lated to the German ‘ Bilchse [‘receptacle’], and that she had then been 
plagued by a recollection that ‘ Buchse is used as a vulgar term for the fe- 
male genitals. If some allowance was made for the limits of her knowledge 
of topographical anatomy, it might be presumed, therefore, that the child 
lying in the case meant an embryo in the womb. After being enlightened 
up to this point, she no longer denied that the dream-picture corre- 
sponded to a wish of hers. Like so many young married women, she had 
been far from pleased when she became pregnant; and more than once she 
had allowed herself to wish that the child in her womb might die. Indeed, 
in a fit of rage after a violent scene with her husband, she had beaten with 
her fists on her body so as to hit the child inside it. Thus the dead child 
was in fact the fulfilment of a wish, but of a wish that had been put aside 
fifteen years earlier. It is scarcely to be wondered at if a wish that was ful- 
filled after such a long delay was not recognized. Too much had changed 
in the interval. 2 

I shall have to return to the group of dreams to which the last two exam- 
ples belong (dreams dealing with the death of relatives of whom the dreamer 
is fond) when I come to consider ‘typical’ dreams [pp. 266 f£] . I shall then 
be able to show from further instances that, in spite of their unwished-for 
contents, all such dreams must be interpreted as wish-fulfilments. 


1 Like the smoked salmon in the dream of the abandoned supper-party. [See 
above, p. 172 £] 

1 [This dream is further discussed on p. 267 and is also reported briefly in Lecture 
XIII of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916-17).] 




IV. Distortion in Dreams 


179 


I owe the following dream, not to a patient, but to an intelligent jurist 
of my acquaintance. He told it to me, once again, in order to restrain me 
from rash generalizing on the theory of wishful dreams. ‘I dreamt,’ said my 
informant, ‘that I came up to my house with a lady on my arm. A closed car- 
riage was standing in front of it and a man came up to me, showed me his cre- 
dentials as a police officer and requested me to follow him. I asked him to alloiv 
me a little time to put my affairs in order. Can you suppose that I have a 
wish to be arrested?’ — Of course not, I could only agree. Do you happen 
to know the charge on which you were arrested? — ‘Yes, for infanticide, 1 
believe.’ — Infanticide? But surely you’re aware that that’s a crime that can 
only be committed by a mother on a newborn child? — ‘Quite true.’ 1 — 
And what were the circumstances in which you had the dream? What hap- 
pened on the previous evening? — ‘I would prefer not to tell you. It’s a 
delicate matter.’ — Nevertheless I shall have to hear it; otherwise we shall 
have to give up the idea of interpreting the dream. — ‘Very well then, lis- 
ten. I didn’t spend last night at home but with a lady who means a great 
deal to me. When we woke up in the morning there was a further passage 
between us, after which I went to sleep again and had the dream I de- 
scribed to you.’ — Is she a married woman? — ‘Yes.’ — And you don’t want 
to have a child by her? — ‘Oh, no; that might give us away.’ — So you don’t 
practice normal intercourse? — ‘I take the precaution of withdrawing be- 
fore ejaculation.’ — I think I may assume that you had used this device sev- 
eral times during the night, and that after repeating it in the morning you 
felt a little uncertain whether you had carried it out successfully. — ‘That’s 
possible, no doubt.’ — In that case your dream was the fulfilment of a wish. 
It gave you a reassurance that you had not procreated a child, or, what 
amounts to the same thing, that you had killed a child. The intermediate 
links are easily indicated. You remember that a few days ago we were talk- 
ing about marriage difficulties and how inconsistent it is that there should 
be no objection to carrying out intercourse in such a way that no fertiliza- 
tion takes place, whereas any interference when once the ovum and semen 
have come together and a foetus has been formed is punished as a crime. 
We went on to recall the mediaeval controversy over the exact point of 


1 It often happens that the account first given of a dream is incomplete and that 
the memory of the omitted portions only emerges in the course of analysis. 
These subsequently added portions regularly turn out to provide the key to the 
dream’s interpretation. Cf. the discussion below on the forgetting of dreams [pp. 
522 ff.]. 




180 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


time at which the soul enters the foetus, since it is not until after that that 
the concept of murder becomes applicable. No doubt, too, you know 
Lenau’s gruesome poem [‘Das tote Gliick’] in which child murder and 
child prevention are equated. — ‘Oddly enough I happened to think of 
Lenau this morning, quite by chance, as it seemed.’ — An after-echo of 
your dream. And now I can show you another incidental wish-fulfilment 
contained in your dream. You came up to your house with the lady on 
your arm. Thus you were bringing her home, 1 instead of spending the 
night in her house as you did in reality. There may be more than one rea- 
son why the wish-fulfilment which constitutes the core of the dream was 
disguised in such a disagreeable form. Perhaps you have learned from my 
paper on the aetiology of anxiety neurosis [Freud, 1895 b] that I regard 
coitus interruptus as one of the aetiological factors in the development of 
neurotic anxiety? It would tally with this if, after carrying out sexual inter- 
course in this way several times, you were left in an uneasy mood which 
afterwards became an element in the construction of your dream. More- 
over, you made use of this moodiness to help disguise the wish-fulfilment. 
[Cf. p. 492.] Incidentally, your reference to infanticide has not been ex- 
plained. How did you come to light on this specifically feminine crime? — 
‘I must admit that some years ago I became involved in an occurrence of 
that kind. 1 was responsible for a girl’s trying to avoid the consequence of 
a love-affair with me by means of an abortion. I had nothing to do with 
her carrying out her intention, but for a long time I naturally felt very ner- 
vous in case the business came out.’ — I quite understand that. This recol- 
lection provides a second reason why you must have been worried by your 
suspicion that your device might have gone wrong. 2 

A young physician who heard me describe this dream during a course 
of lectures must have been greatly struck by it, for he promptly re-dreamt 
it, applying the same pattern of thought to another theme. The day be- 
fore, he had sent in his income tax return, which he had filled in perfectly 
honestly, since he had very little to declare. He then had a dream that an 
acquaintance of his came to him from a meeting of the tax commissioners and 
informed him that, while no objection had been raised to any of the other tax 
returns, general suspicion had been aroused by his and a heavy fine had been 
imposed on him. The dream was a poorly disguised fulfilment of his wish 


1 [The German 'heimflihren means both ‘to bring home’ and ‘to marry.’] 

2 [This dream was recorded in Draft I, attached to Freud’s letter to Fliess of May 
2, 1897 (Freud, 1950 a. Letter 61).] 




IV. Distortion in Dreams 


181 


to be known as a doctor with a large income. It recalls the well-known 
story of the girl who was advised not to accept a suitor because he had a 
violent temper and would be sure to beat her if they were married. ‘If 
only he’d begun beating me already!’ the girl replied. Her wish to be mar- 
ried was so intense that she was ready to take the threatened unpleasant- 
ness into the bargain, and even went so far as to turn it into a wish. 

The very frequent dreams, 1 which appear to stand in contradiction to 
my theory because their subject-matter is the frustration of a wish or the 
occurrence of something clearly unwished-for, may be brought together 
under the heading of ‘counter-wish dreams.’ If these dreams are consid- 
ered as a whole, it seems to me possible to trace them back to two princi- 
ples; I have not yet mentioned one of these, although it plays a large part 
not only in people’s dreams but in their lives as well. One of the two mo- 
tive forces leading to such dreams is the wish that I may be wrong. These 
dreams appear regularly in the course of my treatments when a patient is 
in a state of resistance to me; and I can count almost certainly on provok- 
ing one of them after 1 have explained to a patient for the first time my 
theory that dreams are fulfilment of wishes. 2 Indeed, it is to be expected 
that the same thing will happen to some of the readers of the present 
book: they will be quite ready to have one of their wishes frustrated in a 
dream if only their wish that 1 may be wrong can be fulfilled. 

The same point is illustrated by one last dream of the kind which 1 
will quote from a patient under treatment. This was the dream of a girl 
who had succeeded in her struggle to continue her treatment with me 
against the will of her relatives and of the authorities whose opinions had 
been consulted. She dreamt that her people forbade her to go on coming to 
me. She then reminded me of a promise I had given her that if necessary I 
ivould continue the treatment ivithout a fee. To this I replied: 7 cannot make 
any allowances in money matters.’ It must be admitted that it was not easy 
to point to the wish-fulfilment in this instance. But in all such cases one 
discovers a second riddle, the solution of which helps one to solve the 
original one. What was the origin of the words she put into my mouth? 
Of course I had said nothing of the kind to her; but one of her brothers, 


1 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1909.] 

2 [Footnote added 1911:] During the last few years similar ‘counter-wish dreams’ 
have repeatedly been reported to me by people who have heard me lecturing, as 
a reaction to first making the acquaintance of my ‘wishful’ theory of dreams. 




182 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


and the one by whom she was most influenced, had been good enough 
to attribute this sentiment to me. The dream was thus intended to prove 
her brother right. And it was not only in her dreams that she insisted on 
his being right; the same idea dominated her whole life and it was the 
motive of her illness. 

A dream 1 which seems at first sight to put special difficulties in the 
way of the wish-fulfilment theory was dreamt and interpreted by a physi- 
cian, and reported by August Starcke (1911): ‘I saiv upon my left index- 
finger the first indication [Primdraffekt] of syphilis on the terminal phalange.' 
The reflection that, apart from the dream’s unwished-for content, it ap- 
pears to be clear and coherent, might dissuade us from analysing it. If, 
however, we are prepared to face the trouble involved, we shall find that 
‘ Primdraffekt’ was equivalent to a firima ajfectio' (a first love), and that the 
repellent ulcer turned out, to quote Starcke’s words, to ‘stand for wish- 
fulfilments that were highly charged with emotion.’ 

The second motive for counter-wish dreams 2 is so obvious that it is 
easy to overlook it, as I did myself for some considerable time. There is a 
masochistic component in the sexual constitution of many people, which 
arises from the reversal of an aggressive, sadistic component into its op- 
posite. 3 Those who find their pleasure, not in having physical pain in- 
flicted on them, but in humiliation and mental torture, may be described 
as ‘mental masochists.’ It will at once be seen that people of this kind can 
have counter-wish dreams and unpleasurable dreams, which are none the 
less wish-fulfilments since they satisfy their masochistic inclinations. I will 
quote one such dream, produced by a young man who in his earlier years 
had greatly tormented his elder brother, to whom he had a homosexual 
attachment. His character having undergone a fundamental change, he 
had the following dream, which was in three pieces: I. His elder brother 
was chaffing him. II. Two grown men were caressing each other ivith a homo- 
sexual purpose. III. His brother had sold the business ofiivhich he himself had 
looked forward to becoming the director. He awoke from the last dream 
with the most distressing feelings. Nevertheless it was a masochistic wish- 
ful dream, and might be translated thus: ‘It would serve me right if my 
brother were to confront me with this sale as a punishment for all the tor- 
ments he had to put up with from me.’ 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.] 

2 [This paragraph was added in 1909.] 

3 [The author’s amended views on this subject will be found in Freud, 1924c.] 




IV. Distortion in Dreams 


183 


I hope that the foregoing examples will be enough (till the next objec- 
tion is raised) to make it seem plausible that even dreams with a distressing 
content are to be construed as wish-fulfilments . 1 2 Nor will anyone regard it 
as a chance coincidence that the interpretation of these dreams has 
brought us up each time against topics about which people are loth to 
speak or to think. The distressing feeling aroused by these dreams is no 
doubt identical with the repugnance which tends (usually with success) to 
restrain us from discussing or mentioning such topics, and which each of 
us has to overcome if we nevertheless find ourselves compelled to embark 
on them. But the unpleasurable feeling which thus recurs in dreams does 
not disprove the existence of a wish. Everyone has wishes that he would 
prefer not to disclose to other people, and wishes that he will not admit 
even to himself. On the other hand, we are justified in linking the unplea- 
surable character of all these dreams with the fact of dream-distortion. And 
we are justified in concluding that these dreams are distorted and the wish- 
fulfilment contained in them disguised to the point of being unrecogniz- 
able precisely owing to the repugnance felt for the topic of the dream or 
for the wish derived from it and to an intention to repress them. The dis- 
tortion in the dream is thus shown in fact to be an act of the censorship. 
We shall be taking into account everything that has been brought to light 
by our analysis of unpleasurable dreams if we make the following modifica- 
tion in the formula in which we have sought to express the nature of dreams: 
a dream is a ( disguised ) fulfilment of a ( suppressed or repressed ) wish . 1 

There remain to be discussed anxiety-dreams as a special sub-species of 
dreams with a distressing content. The notion of regarding these as wish- 
ful dreams will meet with very little sympathy from the unenlightened. 


1 [The following sentence was included in the text, in a slightly different form, in 
1919 and printed as a footnote in 1925:] ‘I must point out that the subject is 
not yet finally disposed of; I shall return to it later on.’ [See pp. 557.] 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] A great living writer, who, as I have been told, refuses to 
hear anything of psycho-analysis or the interpretation of dreams, has independ- 
ently arrived at an almost identical formula for the nature of dreams. He speaks 
of a dream as ‘the unauthorized emergence of suppressed desires and wishes, un- 
der false features and name.’ (Spitteler, 1914, 1.) 

[Added 1911:] I shall anticipate questions which will be discussed later by 
quoting at this point Otto Rank’s enlargement and modification of the above 
basic formula: ‘On the basis and with the help of repressed, infantile sexual ma- 
terial, dreams regularly represent present-day, and also as a rule erotic, wishes as 
fulfilled, in a veiled and symbolically disguised shape.’ (Rank, 1910, [519].) 



184 


IV. Distortion in Dreams 


Nevertheless I can deal with anxiety-dreams very briefly at this point. They 
do not present us with a new aspect of the dream-problem; what they face 
us with is the whole question of neurotic anxiety. The anxiety that we feel 
in a dream is only apparently explained by the dream’s content. If we sub- 
mit the content of the dream to analysis, we find that the anxiety in the 
dream is no better justified by the dream’s content than, let us say, the 
anxiety in a phobia is justified by the idea to which the phobia relates. No 
doubt it is true, for instance, that it is possible to fall out of a window and 
that there is therefore reason for exercising a certain degree of caution in 
the neighbourhood of a window; but we cannot see why the anxiety felt 
in a phobia on this subject is so great and pursues the patient far beyond 
its occasion . 1 We find then that the same thing may be validly asserted 
both of phobias and of anxiety-dreams: in both cases the anxiety is only 
superficially attached to the idea that accompanies it; it originates from an- 
other source. 


[Added 1925:] I have nowhere stated that I adopted Rank’s formula as my 
own. The shorter version, as stated in the text above, seems to me adequate. But 
the mere fact of my having mentioned Rank’s modification has been enough to 
unleash countless accusations against psychoanalysis of having asserted that ‘all 
dreams have a sexual content.’ 

If this sentence is taken in the sense in which it was intended, it merely shows 
the unconscientious manner in which critics are accustomed to perform their 
functions, and the readiness with which opponents overlook the clearest state- 
ments if they do not give scope to their aggressive inclinations. For only a few 
pages earlier [pp. 1 52 ff.] I had mentioned the variety of the wishes whose fulfil- 
ments are to be found in children’s dreams (wishes to take part in an excursion or 
a sail on a lake, or to make up for a missed meal, and so on); and in other passages 
I had discussed dreams of hunger [p. 155 ».], dreams stimulated by thirst [pp. 148 
£] or by excretory needs, and dreams of mere convenience [p. 150]. Even Rank 
himself made no absolute assertion. The words he used were ‘also as a rule erotic 
wishes,’ and what he said can be amply confirmed in the dreams of most adults. 

The situation would be different if ‘sexual’ was being used by my critics in 
the sense in which it is now commonly employed in psychoanalysis — in the 
sense of ‘Eros.’ But my opponents are scarcely likely to have had in mind the in- 
teresting problem of whether all dreams are created by TibidinaT instinctual 
forces as contrasted with ‘destructive’ ones. [Cf. Freud, The Ego and the Id, 
Chapter IV (Freud, 1923^).] 

1 [This particular form of phobia, the fear of falling out of windows, was referred 
to by Freud in a letter to Fliess of December 12, 1896 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 53), 
and again much later in his paper on ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (Freud, 1922a).] 




IV. Distortion in Dreams 


185 


Since this intimate connection exists between anxiety in dreams and 
in neuroses, in discussing the former I must refer to the latter. In a short 
paper on anxiety-neurosis (Freud, 1895 b), I argued some time ago that 
neurotic anxiety is derived from sexual life and corresponds to libido 
which has been diverted from its purpose and has found no employ- 
ment. 1 Since then this formula has met the test of time; and it enables us 
now to infer from it that anxiety-dreams are dreams with a sexual con- 
tent, the libido belonging to which has been transformed into anxiety. 
There will be an opportunity later to support this assertion by the analysis 
of some neurotic patients’ dreams. 2 In the course, too, of a further at- 
tempt to arrive at a theory of dreams, I shall have occasion to discuss once 
more the determinants of anxiety-dreams and their compatibility with 
the theory of wish-fulfilment. 


1 [The author’s later views on the relation between libido and anxiety will be 
found in his Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety (192 Gd).\ 

2 [Freud evidently changed his mind on this point: see pp. 578 f£, where, how- 
ever, two anxiety-dreams are analysed and the whole subject of anxiety-dreams 
is again discussed.] 





CHAPTER V 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 


When the analysis of the dream of Irma’s injection showed us that a 
dream could be the fulfilment of a wish, our interest was at first wholly ab- 
sorbed by the question of whether we had come upon a universal charac- 
teristic of dreams, and for the time being we stifled our curiosity about any 
other scientific problems that may have arisen during the work of the in- 
terpretation. Having followed one path to its end, we may now retrace our 
steps and choose another starting-point for our rambles through the prob- 
lems of dream-life: for the time being, we may leave the topic of wish- 
fulfilment on one side, though we are still far from having exhausted it. 

Now that the application of our procedure for interpreting dreams 
enables us to disclose a latent content in them which is of far greater sig- 
nificance than their manifest one, the pressing task at once arises of re- 
examining one by one the various problems raised by dreams, to see 
whether we may not now be in a position to find satisfactory solutions for 
the conundrums and contradictions which seemed intractable so long as 
we were only acquainted with the manifest content. 

In the first chapter I have given a detailed account of the views of the 
authorities on the relation of dreams with waking life [Section A] and on 
the origin of the material of dreams [Section C]. No doubt, too, my readers 
will recall the three characteristics of memory in dreams [Section B] , which 
have been so often remarked on but which have never been explained: 

(1) Dreams show a clear preference for the impressions of the imme- 
diately preceding days [pp. 50 £]. Cf. Robert [1886, 46], Striimpell [1877, 
39], Hildebrandt [1875, 11] and Hallam and Weed [1896, 410 £]. 


187 



188 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


(2) They make their selection upon different principles from our 
waking memory, since they do not recall what is essential and important 
but what is subsidiary and unnoticed. [Pp. 5 1 f£] 

(3) They have at their disposal the earliest impressions of our child- 
hood and even bring up details from that period of our life which, once 
again, strike us as trivial and which in our waking state we believe to have 
been long since forgotten. [Pp. 48 ff.] 1 

All these peculiarities shown by dreams in their choice of material 
have, of course, only been studied by earlier writers in connection with 
their manifest content. 


(A) 

RECENT AND INDIFFERENT MATERIAL IN DREAMS 

If I examine my own experience on the subject of the origin of the el- 
ements included in the content of dreams, I must begin with an assertion 
that in every dream it is possible to find a point of contact with the expe- 
riences of the previous day. This view is confirmed by every dream that I 
look into, whether my own or anyone else’s. Bearing this fact in mind, I 
am able, on occasion, to begin a dream’s interpretation by looking for the 
event of the previous day which set it in motion; in many instances, in- 
deed, this is the easiest method. 2 In the two dreams which I have analysed 
in detail in my last chapters (the dream of Irma’s injection and the dream 
of my uncle with a yellow beard) the connection with the previous day is 
so obvious as to require no further comment. But in order to show the 
regularity with which such a connection can be traced, I will go through 
the records of my own dreams and give some instances. I shall only quote 
enough of the dream to indicate the source we are looking for: 


1 The view adopted by Robert [1886, 9 £] that the purpose of dreams is to unbur- 
den our memory of the useless impressions of daytime [c£ pp. 105 £] is plainly 
no longer tenable if indifferent memory images from our childhood appear at all 
frequently in dreams. Otherwise we could only conclude that dreams perform 
their function most inadequately. 

1 [The different ways of beginning the interpretation of a dream are discussed in 
Section I of Freud, 1923c.] 




A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


189 


(1) I was visiting a house into which I had difficulty in gaining admit- 
tance . . . ; in the meantime I kept a lady waiting. 

Source: I had had a conversation with a female relative the evening be- 
fore in which 1 had told her that she would have to wait for a purchase 
she wanted to make till . . . etc. 

(2) I had written a monograph on a certain (indistinct) species of plant. 

Source: That morning I had seen a monograph on the genus Cyclamen 

in the window of a bookshop. [See below, pp. 193 f£] 

(3) I saw two women in the street, a mother and daughter, the latter 
of ivhom was a patient of mine. 

Source: One of my patients had explained to me the previous evening 
the difficulties her mother was putting in the way of her continuing her 
treatment. 

(4) I took out a subscription in S. and R. s bookshop for a periodical cost- 
ing twenty florins a year. 

Source: My wife had reminded me the day before that I still owed her 
twenty florins for the weekly household expenses. 

(5) / received a communication from the Social Democratic Commit- 
tee, treating me as though I were a member. 

Source: I had received communications simultaneously from the Liberal 
Election Committee and from the Council of the Humanitarian League, 
of which latter body I was in fact a member. 

(6) A man standing on a cliff in the middle of the sea, in the style 
of Bocklin. 

Source: Dreyfus on the lie du Diable; I had had news at the same time 
from my relatives in England, etc. 

The question may be raised whether the point of contact with the 
dream is invariably the events of the immediately preceding day or whether 
it may go back to impressions derived from a rather more extensive period 
of the most recent past. It is unlikely that this question involves any matter 
of theoretical importance; nevertheless I am inclined to decide in favour of 
the exclusiveness of the claims of the day immediately preceding the 
dream — which I shall speak of as the ‘dream-day.’ Whenever it has seemed 
at first that the source of a dream was an impression two or three days ear- 
lier, closer enquiry has convinced me that the impression had been recalled 
on the previous day and thus that it was possible to show that a reproduc- 
tion of the impression, occurring on the previous day, could be inserted be- 
tween the day of the original event and the time of the dream; moreover it 



190 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


has been possible to indicate the contingency on the previous day which 
may have led to the recalling of the older impression. 

On the other hand 1 I do not feel convinced that there is any regular 
interval of biological significance between the instigating daytime impres- 
sion and its recurrence in the dream. (Swoboda, 1904, has mentioned an 
initial period of eighteen hours in this connection.) 2 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1909.] 

2 [Footnote added 191 1:] As I have mentioned in a postscript to my first chapter 
(p. 120), Hermann Swoboda [1904] has made a far-reaching application to the 
mental field of the biological periodic intervals of 23 and 28 days discovered by 
Wilhelm Fliess [1906]. He has asserted in particular that these periods deter- 
mine the emergence of the elements which appear in dreams. No essential mod- 
ification in dream-interpretation would be involved if this fact were to be 
established; it would merely provide a fresh source of origin of dream-material. 
I have, however, recently made some investigations upon my own dreams, to test 
how far the ‘theory of periodicity’ is applicable to them. For this purpose I chose 
some specially outstanding dream-elements the time of whose appearance in real 
life could be determined with certainty. 

I. Dream of October 1st-2nd, 1910 

(Fragment) . . . Somewhere in Italy. Three daughters were showing me some small 
curios, as though we were in an antique shop, and were sitting on my lap. I com- 
mented on one of the objects: ‘Why, you got that from me,’ and saw plainly before me 
a small profile relief with the clear-cut features of Savonarola. 

When had I last seen a portrait of Savonarola? My travel-diary proved that I 
had been in Florence on September 4th and 5th. While I was there I thought I 
would show my travelling companion the medallion bearing the fanatical 
monk’s features, let into the pavement of the Piazza della Signoria, which marks 
the place where he was burned. I pointed it out to him, I believe, on the morn- 
ing of the 3rd. [Misprinted ‘5th’ in recent editions.] Between this impression 
and its reappearance in the dream 27+1 days elapsed — Fliess’s ‘female period.’ 
Unluckily for the conclusiveness of this example, however, I must add that on 
the actual ‘dream-day’ I had a visit (for the first time since my return) from a ca- 
pable but gloomy-looking medical colleague of mine whom I had many years 
before nicknamed ‘Rabbi Savonarola.’ He introduced a patient to me who was 
suffering from the effects of an accident to the Pontebba express, in which I my- 
self had travelled a week earlier, and my thoughts were thus led back to my re- 
cent visit to Italy. The appearance in the content of the dream of the outstanding 
element ‘Savonarola’ is thus accounted for by my colleague’s visit on the dream- 
day; and the interval of 28 days is deprived of its significance. 




A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


191 


II. Dream of October 10th-11th, 1910 

I was once more working at chemistry in the University laboratory. Hofrat L. in- 
vited me to come somewhere and walked in front of me along the corridor, holding a 
lamp or some other instrument before him in his uplifted hand and with his head 
stretched forward in a pecidiar attitude, with a clear-sighted (? far-sighted) look 
about him. Then we crossed an open space. . . . (The remainder was forgotten.) 

The most outstanding point in the content of this dream was the way in 
which Hofrat L. held the lamp (or magnifying glass) before him, with his eyes 
peering into the distance. It was many years since I had last seen him; but I knew 
at once that he was only a substitute figure in the place of someone else, some- 
one greater than he — Archimedes, whose statue stands near the Fountain of 
Arethusa at Syracuse in that very attitude, holding up his burning-glass and 
peering out towards the besieging army of the Romans. When did I see that 
statue for the first (and last) time? According to my diary it was on the evening 
of September 17th; and between then and the time of the dream 13 + 10 = 23 
days had elapsed — Fliess’s ‘male period.’ 

Unfortunately, when we go into the interpretation of this dream in greater 
detail, we once again find that the coincidence loses some of its conclusiveness. 
The exciting cause of the dream was the news I received on the dream-day that the 
clinic, in whose lecture room I was able by courtesy to deliver my lectures, was 
shortly to be removed to another locality. I took it for granted that its new situa- 
tion would be very out of the way and told myself that in that case I might just as 
well not have a lecture room at my disposal at all. From that point my thoughts 
must have gone back to the beginning of my career as University Lecturer when I 
in fact had no lecture room and when my efforts to get hold of one met with little 
response from the powerfully placed Hofrats and Professors. In those circum- 
stances I had gone to L„ who at that time held the office of Dean of the Faculty 
and who I believed was friendlily disposed to me, to complain of my troubles. He 
promised to help me, but I heard nothing more from him. In the dream he was 
Archimedes, giving me a iron cttCo [footing] and himself leading me to the new 
locality. Anyone who is an adept at interpretation will guess that the dream- 
thoughts were not exactly free from ideas of vengeance and self-importance. It 
seems clear, in any case, that without this exciting cause Archimedes would scarcely 
have found his way into my dream that night; nor am I convinced that the pow- 
erful and still recent impression made on me by the statue in Syracuse might not 
have produced its effect after some different interval of time. 

III. Dream of October 2nd-3rd, 1910 

(Fragment) . . . Something about Professor Oser, who had drawn up the menu for 
me himself, which had a very soothing effect. . . . (Some more that was forgotten.) 




192 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


Havelock Ellis [1911, 224], 1 who has also given some attention to this 
point, declares that he was unable to find any such periodicity in his 
dreams in spite of looking for it. He records a dream of being in Spain 
and of wanting to go to a place called Daraus, Varaus or Zaraus. On wak- 
ing he could not recall any such place-name, and put the dream on one 
side. A few months later he discovered that Zaraus was in fact the name 
of a station on the line between San Sebastian and Bilbao, through which 
his train had passed 250 days before he had the dream. 

I believe, then, that the instigating agent of every dream is to be 
found among the experiences which one has not yet ‘slept on.’ Thus the 
relations of a dream’s content to impressions of the most recent past 
(with the single exception of the day immediately preceding the night of 
the dream) differ in no respect from its relations to impressions dating 
from any remoter period. Dreams can select their material from any part 
of the dreamer’s life, provided only that there is a train of thought link- 
ing the experience of the dream-day (the ‘recent’ impressions) with the 
earlier ones. 

But why this preference for recent impressions? We shall form some no- 
tion on this point, if we submit one of the dreams in the series I have just 
quoted [p. 189] to a fuller analysis. For this purpose I shall choose the 


This dream was a reaction to a digestive disturbance that day, which made me 
consider whether I should go to one of my colleagues to have a dietary pre- 
scribed for me. My reason for choosing Oser for that purpose, who had died in 
the course of the summer, went back to the death of another University teacher 
whom I greatly admired, which had occurred shortly before (on October 1st). 
When had Oser died? and when had I heard of his death? According to a para- 
graph in the papers he had died on August 22nd. I had been in Holland at that 
time and had my Vienna newspaper sent on to me regularly; so that I must have 
read of his death on August 24th or 25th. But here the interval no longer corre- 
sponds to either period. It amounts to 7 + 30 + 2 = 39 days or possibly 40 days. 
I could not recall having spoken or thought of Oser in the meantime. 

Intervals such as this one, which cannot be fitted into the theory of periodic- 
ity without further manipulation, occur far more frequently in my dreams than 
intervals which can be so fitted. The only relation which I find occurs with reg- 
ularity is the relation which I have insisted upon in the text and which connects 
the dream with some impression of the dream-day. 

1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.] 




A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


193 


Dream of the Botanical Monograph 

/ had written a monograph on a certain plant. The book lay before me 
and I was at the moment turning over a folded coloured plate. Bound up in 
each copy there was a dried specimen of the plant, as though it had been taken 
from a herbarium. 


Analysis 

That morning I had seen a new book in the window of a bookshop, 
bearing the title The Genus Cyclamen — evidently a monograph on that 
plant. 

Cyclamens, I reflected, were my wife’s favourite flowers and I reproached 
myself for so rarely remembering to bring her flowers , which was what she 
liked. — The subject of ‘ bring floivers recalled an anecdote which I had re- 
cently repeated to a circle of friends and which I had used as evidence in 
favour of my theory that forgetting is very often determined by an uncon- 
scious purpose and that it always enables one to deduce the secret inten- 
tions of the person who forgets. 1 A young woman was accustomed to 
receiving a bouquet of flowers from her husband on her birthday. One year 
this token of his affection failed to appear, and she burst into tears. Her hus- 
band came in and had no idea why she was crying till she told him that to- 
day was her birthday. He clasped his hand to his head and exclaimed: ‘I’m 
so sorry, but I’d quite forgotten. I’ll go out at once and fetch your floivers.’ 
But she was not to be consoled; for she recognized that her husband’s for- 
getfulness was a proof that she no longer had the same place in his thoughts 
as she had formerly. — This lady, Frau L., had met my wife two days before 
I had the dream, had told her that she was feeling quite well and enquired 
after me. Some years ago she had come to me for treatment. 

I now made a fresh start. Once, I recalled, I really had written some- 
thing in the nature of a monograph on a plant, namely a dissertation on 
the coca-plant [Freud, 1884*?], which had drawn Karl Koller’s attention to 


1 [The theory was published a few months after the date of the dream, in Freud 
(18986), and then incorporated in The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (Freud, 
19016).] 




194 V. Material and Sources of Dreams 

the anaesthetic properties of cocaine. I had myself indicated this applica- 
tion of the alkaloid in my published paper, but I had not been thorough 
enough to pursue the matter further. 1 This reminded me that on the 
morning of the day after the dream — I had not found time to interpret it 
till the evening — I had thought about cocaine in a kind of daydream. If 
ever I got glaucoma, I had thought, I should travel to Berlin and get my- 
self operated on, incognito, in my friend’s [Fliess’s] house, by a surgeon 
recommended by him. The operating surgeon, who would have no idea 
of my identity, would boast once again of how easily such operations 
could be performed since the introduction of cocaine; and 1 should not 
give the slightest hint that I myself had had a share in the discovery. This 
phantasy had led on to reflections of how awkward it is, when all is said 
and done, for a physician to ask for medical treatment for himself from 
his professional colleagues. The Berlin eye-surgeon would not know me, 
and I should be able to pay his fees like anyone else. It was not until I had 
recalled this daydream that I realized that the recollection of a specific 
event lay behind it. Shortly after Koller’s discovery, my father had in fact 
been attacked by glaucoma; my friend Dr. Konigstein, the ophthalmic 
surgeon, had operated on him; while Dr. Koller had been in charge of the 
cocaine anaesthesia and had commented on the fact that this case had 
brought together all of the three men who had had a share in the intro- 
duction of cocaine. 

My thoughts then went on to the occasion when I had last been re- 
minded of this business of the cocaine. It had been a few days earlier, 
when I had been looking at a copy of a Festschrift in which grateful pupils 
had celebrated the jubilee of their teacher and laboratory director. Among 
the laboratory’s claims to distinction which were enumerated in this book 
I had seen a mention of the fact that Koller had made his discovery there 
of the anaesthetic properties of cocaine. I then suddenly perceived that 
my dream was connected with an event of the previous evening. I had 
walked home precisely with Dr. Konigstein and had got into conversation 
with him about a matter which never fails to excite my feelings whenever 
it is raised. While I was talking to him in the entrance-hall, Professor 
Gartner [Gardener] and his wife had joined us; and I could not help con- 
gratulating them both on their blooming looks. But Professor Gartner was 
one of the authors of the Festschrift I have just mentioned, and may well 
have reminded me of it. Moreover, the Frau L., whose disappointment on 


1 [See footnote 1, p. 136.] 




A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


195 


her birthday I described earlier, was mentioned — though only, it is true, 
in another connection — in my conversation with Dr. Konigstein. 

I will make an attempt at interpreting the other determinants of the 
content of the dream as well. There was a dried specimen of the plant in- 
cluded in the monograph, as though it had been a herbarium. This led 
me to a memory from my secondary school. Our headmaster once called 
together the boys from the higher forms and handed over the school’s 
herbarium to them to be looked through and cleaned. Some small 
worms — bookworms — had found their way into it. He does not seem to 
have had much confidence in my helpfulness, for he handed me only a 
few sheets. These, as I could still recall, included some Crucifers. I never 
had a specially intimate contact with botany. In my preliminary exami- 
nation in botany I was also given a Crucifer to identify — and failed to do 
so. My prospects would not have been too bright, if I had not been 
helped out by my theoretical knowledge. I went on from the Cruciferae 
to the Compositae. It occurred to me that artichokes were Compositae, 
and indeed I might fairly have called them my favourite flowers. Being 
more generous than I am, my wife often brought me back these favourite 
flowers of mine from the market. 

I saw the monograph which I had written lying before me. This again 
led me back to something. I had had a letter from my friend [Fliess] in 
Berlin the day before in which he had shown his power of visualization: 
‘I am very much occupied with your dream-book. I see it lyingfinished be- 
fore me and I see myself turning over its pages! 1 How much 1 envied him 
his gift as a seer! If only / could have seen it lying finished before me! 

The folded coloured plate. While I was a medical student I was the con- 
stant victim of an impulse only to learn things out of monographs. In spite 
of my limited means, I succeeded in getting hold of a number of volumes 
of the proceedings of medical societies and was enthralled by their coloured 
plates. I was proud of my hankering for thoroughness. When I myself had 
begun to publish papers, I had been obliged to make my own drawings to 
illustrate them and I remembered that one of them had been so wretched 
that a friendly colleague had jeered at me over it. There followed, I could 
not quite make out how, a recollection from very early youth. It had once 
amused my father to hand over a book with coloured plates (an account of 


1 [Freud’s reply to this letter from Fliess is dated March 10, 1898 (Freud, 1950a, 
Letter 84); so that the dream must have occurred not more than a day or two 
earlier.] 




196 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


a journey through Persia) for me and my eldest sister to destroy. Not easy 
to justify from the educational point of view! I had been five years old at 
the time and my sister not yet three; and the picture of the two of us bliss- 
fully pulling the book to pieces (leaf by leaf, like an artichoke, I found my- 
self saying) was almost the only plastic memory that I retained from that 
period of my life. Then, when I became a student, I had developed a pas- 
sion for collecting and owning books, which was analogous to my liking 
for learning out of monographs: a favourite hobby. (The idea of favourite 
had already appeared in connection with cyclamens and artichokes.) I had 
become a bookworm. 1 had always, from the time I first began to think 
about myself, referred this first passion of mine back to the childhood 
memory I have mentioned. Or rather, I had recognized that the childhood 
scene was a ‘screen memory’ for my later bibliophile propensities. 1 And I 
had early discovered, of course, that passions often lead to sorrow. When 
I was seventeen I had run up a largish account at the bookseller’s and had 
nothing to meet it with; and my father had scarcely taken it as an excuse 
that my inclinations might have chosen a worse outlet. The recollection of 
this experience from the later years of my youth at once brought back to 
my mind the conversation with my friend Dr. Konigstein. For in the 
course of it we had discussed the same question of my being blamed for 
being too much absorbed in my favourite hobbies. 

For reasons with which we are not concerned, I shall not pursue the in- 
terpretation of this dream any further, but will merely indicate the direc- 
tion in which it lay. In the course of the work of analysis I was reminded 
of my conversation with Dr. Konigstein, and I was brought to it from 
more than one direction. When I take into account the topics touched 
upon in that conversation, the meaning of the dream becomes intelligible 
to me. All the trains of thought starting from the dream — the thoughts 
about my wife’s and my own favourite flowers, about cocaine, about the 
awkwardness of medical treatment among colleagues, about my preference 
for studying monographs and about my neglect of certain branches of sci- 
ence such as botany — all of these trains of thought, when they were fur- 
ther pursued, led ultimately to one or other of the many ramifications of 
my conversation with Dr. Konigstein. Once again the dream, like the one 
we first analysed — the dream of Irma’s injection — turns out to have been 
in the nature of a self-justification, a plea on behalf of my own rights. In- 


1 Cf. my paper on screen memories [Freud, 1899 a]. 



A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


197 


deed, it carried the subject that was raised in the earlier dream a stage fur- 
ther and discussed it with reference to fresh material that had arisen in the 
interval between the two dreams. Even the apparently indifferent form in 
which the dream was couched turns out to have had significance. What it 
meant was: ‘After all, I’m the man who wrote the valuable and memorable 
paper (on cocaine),’ just as in the earlier dream 1 had said on my behalf: 
‘I’m a conscientious and hard-working student.’ In both cases what I was 
insisting was: ‘I may allow myself to do this.’ There is, however, no need 
for me to carry the interpretation of the dream any further, since my only 
purpose in reporting it was to illustrate by an example the relation between 
the content of a dream and the experience of the previous day which pro- 
voked it. So long as I was aware only of the dream’s manifest content, it 
appeared to be related only to a single event of the dream-day. But when 
the analysis was carried out, a second source of the dream emerged in an- 
other experience of the same day. The first of these two impressions with 
which the dream was connected was an indifferent one, a subsidiary cir- 
cumstance: I had seen a book in a shop-window whose title attracted my 
attention for a moment but whose subject-matter could scarcely be of in- 
terest to me. The second experience had a high degree of psychical impor- 
tance: 1 had had a good hour’s lively conversation with my friend the 
eye-surgeon; in the course of it I had given him some information which 
was bound to affect both of us closely, and I had had memories stirred up 
in me which had drawn my attention to a great variety of internal stresses 
in my own mind. Moreover, the conversation had been interrupted before 
its conclusion because we had been joined by acquaintances. 

We must now ask what was the relation of the two impressions of the 
dream-day to each other and to the dream of the subsequent night. In the 
manifest content of the dream only the indifferent impression was alluded 
to, which seems to confirm the notion that dreams have a preference for 
taking up unimportant details of waking life. All the strands of the inter- 
pretation, on the other hand, led to the important impression, to the one 
which had justifiably stirred my feelings. If the sense of the dream is 
judged, as it can only rightly be, by its latent content as revealed by the 
analysis, a new and significant fact is unexpectedly brought to light. The 
conundrum of why dreams are concerned only with worthless fragments 
of waking life seems to have lost all its meaning; nor can it any longer be 
maintained that waking life is not pursued further in dreams and that 
dreams are thus psychical activity wasted upon foolish material. The con- 
trary is true: our dream-thoughts are dominated by the same material that 



198 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


has occupied us during the day and we only bother to dream of things 
which have given us cause for reflection in the daytime. 

Why is it, then, that, though the occasion of my dreaming was a day- 
time impression by which I had been justifiably stirred, I nevertheless 
actually dreamt of something indifferent? The most obvious explanation, 
no doubt, is that we are once more faced by one of the phenomena of 
dream-distortion, which in my last chapter I traced to a psychical force 
acting as a censorship. My recollection of the monograph on the genus 
Cyclamen would thus serve the purpose of being an allusion to the con- 
versation with my friend, just as the ‘smoked salmon’ in the dream of the 
abandoned supper-party [pp. 172 £] served as an allusion to the dreamer’s 
thought of her woman friend. The only question is as to the intermediate 
links which enabled the impression of the monograph to serve as an allu- 
sion to the conversation with the eye-surgeon, since at first sight there is 
no obvious connection between them. In the example of the abandoned 
supper-party the connection was given at once: ‘smoked salmon,’ being 
the friend’s favourite dish, was an immediate constituent of the group of 
ideas which were likely to be aroused in the dreamer’s mind by the per- 
sonality of her friend. In this later example there were two detached im- 
pressions which at a first glance only had in common the fact of their 
having occurred on the same day: I had caught sight of the monograph 
in the morning and had had the conversation the same evening. The 
analysis enabled us to solve the problem as follows: connections of this 
kind, when they are not present in the first instance, are woven retrospec- 
tively between the ideational content of one impression and that of the 
other. 1 have already drawn attention to the intermediate links in the 
present case by the words I have italicized in my record of the analysis. If 
there had been no influences from another quarter, the idea of the mono- 
graph on the Cyclamen would only, I imagine, have led to the idea of its 
being my wife’s favourite flower, and possibly also to Frau L.’s absent 
bouquet. I scarcely think that these background thoughts would have suf- 
ficed to evoke a dream. As we are told in Hamlet: 

There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave 

To tell us this. 

But, lo and behold, 1 was reminded in the analysis that the man who in- 
terrupted our conversation was called Gartner [Gardener] and that I had 
thought his wife looked blooming. And even as I write these words I recall 



A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


199 


that one of my patients, who bore the charming name of Flora, was for a 
time the pivot of our discussion. These must have been the intermediate 
links, arising from the botanical group of ideas, which formed the bridge 
between the two experiences of that day, the indifferent and the stirring 
one. A further set of connections was then established — those surround- 
ing the idea of cocaine, which had every right to serve as a link between 
the figure of Dr. Konigstein and a botanical monograph which I had 
written; and these connections strengthened the fusion between the two 
groups of ideas so that it became possible for a portion of the one 
experience to serve as an allusion to the other one. 

I am prepared to find this explanation attacked on the ground of its 
being arbitrary or artificial. What, it may be asked, would have happened 
if Professor Gartner and his wife with her blooming looks had not come 
up to us or if the patient we were talking about had been called Anna in- 
stead of Flora? The answer is simple. If these chains of thought had been 
absent others would no doubt have been selected. It is easy enough to 
construct such chains, as is shown by the puns and riddles that people 
make every day for their entertainment. The realm of jokes knows no 
boundaries. Or, to go a stage further, if there had been no possibility of 
forging enough intermediate links between the two impressions, the 
dream would simply have been different. Another indifferent impression 
of the same day — for crowds of such impressions enter our minds and are 
then forgotten — would have taken the place of the ‘monograph’ in the 
dream, would have linked up with the subject of the conversation and 
would have represented it in the content of the dream. Since it was in fact 
the monograph and not any other idea that was chosen to serve this func- 
tion, we must suppose that it was the best adapted for the connection. 
There is no need for us to emulate Lessing’s Hanschen Schlau and feel as- 
tonished that ‘only the rich people own the most money.’ 1 

A psychological process by which, according to our account, indifferent 
experiences take the place of psychically significant ones, cannot fail to 
arouse suspicion and bewilderment. It will be our task in a later chapter 
[Chapter VI, Section B (pp. 322 ff.)] to make the peculiarities of this ap- 
parently irrational operation more intelligible. At this point we are only 


1 [From one of Lessing’s Sinngedichte (epigrams in verse). A further lengthy dis- 
cussion of this dream will be found below (pp. 300 ff.).] 




200 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


concerned with the effects of a process whose reality I have been driven to 
assume by innumerable and regularly recurrent observations made in 
analysing dreams. What takes place would seem to be something in the 
nature of a ‘displacement’ — of psychical emphasis, shall we say? — by 
means of intermediate links; in this way, ideas which originally had only a 
weak charge of intensity take over the charge from ideas which were origi- 
nally intensely cathected 1 and at last attain enough strength to enable them 
to force an entry into consciousness. Displacements of this kind are no 
surprise to us where it is a question of dealing with quantities of affect or 
with motor activities in general. When a lonely old maid transfers her af- 
fection to animals, or a bachelor becomes an enthusiastic collector, when 
a soldier defends a scrap of coloured cloth — a flag — with his life’s blood, 
when a few seconds’ extra pressure in a handshake means bliss to a lover, 
or when, in Othello, a lost handkerchief precipitates an outburst of rage — 
all of these are instances of psychical displacements to which we raise no 
objection. But when we hear that a decision as to what shall reach our 
consciousness and what shall be kept out of it — what we shall think, in 
short — has been arrived at in the same manner and on the same principles, 
we have an impression of a pathological event and, if such things happen 
in waking life, we describe them as errors in thought. I will anticipate the 
conclusions to which we shall later be led, and suggest that the psychical 
process which we have found at work in dream-displacement, though it 
cannot be described as a pathological disturbance, nevertheless differs from 
the normal and is to be regarded as a process of a more primary nature. 
[See below, Chapter VII, Section E, pp. 585 ffl] 

Thus the fact that the content of dreams includes remnants of trivial 
experiences is to be explained as a manifestation of dream-distortion (by 
displacement); and it will be recalled that we came to the conclusion that 
dream-distortion was the product of a censorship operating in the passage- 
way between two psychical agencies. It is to be expected that the analysis 
of a dream will regularly reveal its true, psychically significant source in 
waking life, though the emphasis has been displaced from the recollection 
of that source on to that of an indifferent one. This explanation brings us 
into complete conflict with Robert’s theory [pp. 105 IF.], which ceases to 
be of any service to us. For the fact which Robert sets out to explain is a 
nonexistent one. His acceptance of it rests on a misunderstanding, on his 


1 [Charged with psychical energy. See Editor’s Introduction, p. xvi £] 




A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


201 


failure to replace the apparent content of dreams by their real meaning. 
And there is another objection that can be raised to Robert’s theory. If it 
were really the business of dreams to relieve our memory of the ‘dregs’ of 
daytime recollections by a special psychical activity, our sleep would be 
more tormented and harder worked than our mental life while we are 
awake. For the number of indifferent impressions from which our mem- 
ory would need to be protected is clearly immensely large: the night 
would not be long enough to cope with such a mass. It is far more likely 
that the process of forgetting indifferent impressions goes forward with- 
out the active intervention of our psychical forces. 

Nevertheless we must not be in a hurry to take leave of Robert’s ideas 
without further consideration. [See pp. 577 f.] We have still not explained 
the fact that one of the indifferent impressions of waking life, one, more- 
over, dating from the day preceding the dream, invariably contributes to- 
wards the dream’s content. The connections between this impression and 
the true source of the dream in the unconscious are not always there 
ready-made; as we have seen, they may only be established retrospectively, 
in the course of the dream- work, 1 with a view, as it were, to making the 
intended displacement feasible. There must therefore be some compelling 
force in the direction of establishing connections precisely with a recent, 
though indifferent, impression; and the latter must possess some attribute 
which makes it especially suitable for this purpose. For if that were not 
so, it would be just as easy for the dream-thoughts to displace their em- 
phasis on to an unimportant component in their own circle of ideas. 

The following observations may help us towards clearing up this point. 
If in the course of a single day we have two or more experiences suitable for 
provoking a dream, the dream will make a combined reference to them as 
a single whole; it is under a necessity to combine them into a unity. Here is an 
instance. One afternoon during the summer I entered a railway compart- 
ment in which I found two acquaintances who were strangers to each other. 
One of them was an eminent medical colleague and the other was a mem- 
ber of a distinguished family with which I had professional relations. I in- 
troduced the two gentlemen to each other, but all through the long journey 
they conducted their conversation with me as a go-between, so that 1 
presently found myself discussing various topics alternately, first with the 


1 [This is the first mention of the fundamentally important concept to which the 
whole of the sixth and longest chapter of the book is devoted.] 




202 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


one and then with the other. I asked my doctor friend to use his influence 
on behalf of a common acquaintance of ours who was just starting a med- 
ical practice. The doctor replied that he was convinced of the young man’s 
capacity, but that his homely appearance would make it hard for him to 
make his way in families of the better class; to which I replied that that was 
the very reason why he needed influential assistance. Turning to my other 
fellow-traveller, I enquired after the health of his aunt — the mother of one 
of my patients — who was lying seriously ill at the time. During the night 
following the journey I had a dream that the young friend on whose behalf 
I had pleaded was sitting in a fashionable drawing room in a select com- 
pany composed of all the distinguished and wealthy people of my acquain- 
tance and, with the easy bearing of a man of the world, was delivering a 
funeral oration on the old lady (who was already dead so far as my dream 
was concerned), the aunt of my second fellow-traveller. (I must confess that 
I had not been on good terms with that lady.) Thus my dream had, once 
again, worked out connections between the two sets of impressions of the 
previous day and had combined them into a single situation. 

Many experiences such as this lead me to assert that the dream-work 
is under some kind of necessity to combine all the sources which have 
acted as stimuli for the dream into a single unity in the dream itself . 1 

I will now proceed to the question of whether the instigating source 
of a dream, revealed by analysis, must invariably be a recent (and signifi- 
cant) event or whether an internal experience, that is, the recollection of a 
psychically important event — a train of thought — can assume the role of 
a dream-instigator. The answer, based upon a large number of analyses, 
is most definitely in favour of the latter alternative. A dream can be insti- 
gated by an internal process which has, as it were, become a recent event, 
owing to thought-activity during the previous day. 


1 The tendency of the dream-work to fuse into a single action all events of interest 
which occur simultaneously has already been remarked on by several writers; e.g. 
Delage (1891, 41) and Delboeuf (1885, 237), who speaks of ‘rapprochement 
force’ [‘enforced convergence’]. [Freud himself had stated this principle in the 
passage in Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and Freud, 1895) quoted in the Editor’s 
Introduction (p. xiv). — At this point the following sentence was added in 1909 
and included in every edition up to that of 1922, after which it was omitted: ‘In 
a later chapter (on the dream-work) we shall come across this compelling im- 
pulse towards combining as an instance of “condensation” — another kind of pri- 
mary psychical process.’ (Cf. pp. 248 and 296 ff.)] 




A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


203 


This seems to be the appropriate moment for tabulating the different 
conditions to which we find that the sources of dreams are subject. The 
source of a dream may be either — 

(a) a recent and psychically significant experience which is repre- 
sented in the dream directly, 1 or 

( b ) several recent and significant experiences which are combined into 
a single unity by the dream, 2 or 

(c) one or more recent and significant experiences which are repre- 
sented in the content of the dream by a mention of a contemporary but 
indifferent experience, 3 or 

id) an internal significant experience (e.g. a memory or a train of 
thought), which is in that case invariably represented in the dream by a 
mention of a recent but indifferent impression. 4 

It will be seen that in interpreting dreams we find one condition al- 
ways fulfilled: one component of the content of the dream is a repetition 
of a recent impression of the previous day. This impression that is to be 
represented in the dream may either itself belong to the circle of ideas sur- 
rounding the actual instigator of the dream — whether as an essential or 
as a trivial portion of it — or it may be derived from the field of an indif- 
ferent impression which has been brought into connection with the ideas 
surrounding the dream-instigator by more or less numerous links. The 
apparent multiplicity of governing conditions is in fact merely dependent 
upon the two alternatives of whether a displacement has or has not taken 
place; and it is worth pointing out that we are enabled by these alterna- 
tives to explain the range of contrast between different dreams just as eas- 
ily as the medical theory is enabled to do by its hypothesis of brain cells 
ranging from partial to total wakefulness. (See above, pp. 107 ff.) 

It will further be observed, if we consider these four possible cases, that 
a psychical element which is significant but not recent (e.g. a train of 
thought or a memory) can be replaced, for the purpose of forming a 
dream, by an element which is recent but indifferent, provided only that 
two conditions are fulfilled: (1) the content of the dream must be con- 
nected with a recent experience, and (2) the instigator of the dream must 


'As in the dream of Irma’s injection [pp. 131 ff.] and in the dream of my uncle 
with the yellow beard [pp. 163 ff.]. 

2 As in the young doctor’s funeral oration [pp. 201 fi], 

3 As in the dream of the botanical monograph [pp. 193 ff.]. 

4 Most of my patients’ dreams during analysis are of this kind. 




204 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


remain a psychically significant process. Only in one case — case ( a ) — are 
both of these conditions fulfilled by one and the same impression. It is to 
be noticed, moreover, that indifferent impressions which are capable of 
being used for constructing a dream so long as they are recent lose that 
capacity as soon as they are a day (or at the most a few days) older. From 
this we must conclude that the freshness of an impression gives it some 
kind of psychical value for purposes of dream-construction equivalent in 
some way to the value of emotionally coloured memories or trains of 
thought. The basis of the value which thus attaches to recent impressions 
in connection with the construction of dreams will only become evident 
in the course of our subsequent psychological discussions . 1 

In this connection it will be noticed, incidentally, that modifications 
in our mnemic and ideational material may take place during the night 
unobserved by our consciousness. We are often advised that before com- 
ing to a final decision on some subject we should ‘sleep on it,’ and this 
advice is evidently justified. But here we have passed from the psychology 
of dreams to that of sleep, and this is not the last occasion on which we 
shall be tempted to do so . 2 


1 See the passage on ‘transference’ in Chapter VII [pp. 562 ff.]. 

2 [ Footnote added 1919:] An important contribution to the part played by recent 
material in the construction of dreams has been made by Potzl (1917) in a paper 
which carries a wealth of implications. In a series of experiments Potzl required 
the subjects to make a drawing of what they had consciously noted of a picture 
exposed to their view in a tachistoscope [an instrument for exposing an object 
to view for an extremely short time] . He then turned his attention to the dreams 
dreamt by the subjects during the following night and required them once more 
to make drawings of appropriate portions of these dreams. It was shown unmis- 
takably that those details of the exposed picture which had not been noted by 
the subject provided material for the construction of the dream, whereas those 
details which had been consciously perceived and recorded in the drawing made 
after the exposure did not recur in the manifest content of the dream. The ma- 
terial that was taken over by the dream-work was modified by it for the purposes 
of dream-construction in its familiar ‘arbitrary’ (or, more properly, ‘autocratic’) 
manner. The questions raised by Potzl’s experiment go far beyond the sphere of 
dream-interpretation as dealt with in the present volume. In passing, it is worth 
remarking on the contrast between this new method of studying the formation 
of dreams experimentally and the earlier, crude technique for introducing into 
the dream stimuli which interrupted the subject’s sleep. [Cf. p. 243 n. 2.] 




A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


205 


An objection, however, may be raised which threatens to upset these 
last conclusions. If indifferent impressions can only find their way into a 
dream provided they are recent, how does it happen that the content of 
dreams also includes elements from an earlier period of life which at the 
time when they were recent possessed, to use StriimpeU’s words [1877, 
40 f], no psychical value, and should therefore have been long since 
forgotten — elements, that is to say, which are neither fresh nor psychically 
significant? 

This objection can be completely dealt with by a reference to the find- 
ings of the psycho-analysis of neurotics. The explanation is that the dis- 
placement which replaces psychically important by indifferent material 
(alike in dreaming and in thinking) has in these cases already taken place 
at the early period of life in question and since then become fixed in the 
memory. These particular elements which were originally indifferent are 
indifferent no longer, since taking over (by means of displacement) the 
value of psychically significant material. Nothing that has really remained 
indifferent can be reproduced in a dream. 

The reader will rightly conclude from the foregoing arguments that 1 
am asserting that there are no indifferent dream-instigators — and conse- 
quently no ‘innocent’ dreams. Those are, in the strictest and most ab- 
solute sense, my opinions — if I leave on one side the dreams of children 
and perhaps brief reactions in dreams to sensations felt during the night. 
Apart from this, what we dream is either manifestly recognizable as psy- 
chically significant, or it is distorted and cannot be judged till the dream 
has been interpreted, after which it will once more be found to be signifi- 
cant. Dreams are never concerned with trivialities; we do not allow our 
sleep to be disturbed by trifles. 1 The apparently innocent dreams turn out 
to be quite the reverse when we take the trouble to analyse them. They 
are, if I may say so, wolves in sheep’s clothing. Since this is another point 
upon which I may expect to be contradicted, and since I am glad of an 
opportunity of showing dream-distortion at work, I will select a number 
of ‘innocent’ dreams from my records and submit them to analysis. 


1 [Footnote added 1914:] Havelock Ellis, a friendly critic of this book, writes (1911, 
166): ‘This is the point at which many of us are no longer able to follow Freud.’ 
Havelock Ellis has not, however, carried out any analyses of dreams and refuses 
to believe how impossible it is to base one’s judgement on their manifest content. 




206 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


i 

An intelligent and cultivated young woman, reserved and undemon- 
strative in her behaviour, reported as follows: I dreamt that I arrived too 
late at the market and coidd get nothing either from the butcher or from the 
woman who sells vegetables. An innocent dream, no doubt; but dreams are 
not as simple as that, so I asked to be told it in greater detail. She there- 
upon gave me the following account. She dreamt she was going to the mar- 
ket with her cook, ivho was carrying the basket. After she had asked for 
something, the butcher said to her: ‘That’s not obtainable any longer, ’and of- 
fered her something else, adding, ‘This is good too. ’ She rejected it and went 
on to the woman who sells vegetables, who tried to get her to buy a peculiar 
vegetable that was tied up in bundles but was of a black colour. She said: ‘I 
don’t recognize that; I ivon’t take it.’ 

The dream’s connection with the previous day was quite straightfor- 
ward. She had actually gone to the market too late and had got nothing. 
The situation seemed to shape itself into the phrase Die Fleischbank war 
schon geschlossen [‘the meat-shop was closed’] . I pulled myself up: was not 
that, or rather its opposite, a vulgar description of a certain sort of sloven- 
liness in a man’s dress? 1 However, the dreamer herself did not use the 
phrase; she may perhaps have avoided using it. Let us endeavour, then, to 
arrive at an interpretation of the details of the dream. 

When anything in a dream has the character of direct speech, that is to 
say, when it is said or heard and not merely thought (and it is easy as a rule 
to make the distinction with certainty), then it is derived from something 
actually spoken in waking life — though, to be sure, this something is 
merely treated as raw material and may be cut up and slightly altered and, 
more especially, divorced from its context. 2 In carrying out an interpreta- 
tion, one method is to start from spoken phrases of this kind. What, then, 
was the origin of the butcher’s remark 1 That’s not obtainable any longer ’? 
The answer was that it came from me myself. A few days earlier 1 had ex- 


1 [‘Du hast deine Fleischbank ojfen (‘your meat-shop’s open’): Viennese slang for 
‘your fly is undone.’] 

1 See my discussion of speeches in dreams in my chapter on the dream-work [pp. 
427 ff.]. Only one writer on the subject seems to have recognized the source of 
spoken phrases occurring in dreams, namely Delboeuf (1885, 226), who com- 
pares them to cliches. [This dream is briefly recorded in Section VII of Freud’s 
short essay On Dreams (1901a); Standard Ed., 5, 668.] 




A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


207 


plained to the patient that the earliest experiences of childhood were ‘ not 
obtainable any longer as such,’ but were replaced in analysis by ‘transfer- 
ences’ and dreams . 1 So I was the butcher and she was rejecting these trans- 
ferences into the present of old habits of thinking and feeling. — What, 
again, was the origin of her own remark in the dream ‘/ don 't recognize 
that; I won ’t take it ’? For the purposes of the analysis this had to be divided 
up. ‘I don ’ t recognize that ’ was something she had said the day before to her 
cook, with whom she had had a dispute; but at the time she had gone on: 

‘ Behave yourself properly!’ At this point there had clearly been a displace- 
ment. Of the two phrases that she had used in the dispute with her cook, 
she had chosen the insignificant one for inclusion in the dream. But it was 
only the suppressed one, ‘ Behave yourself properly!’ that fitted in with the 
rest of the content of the dream: those would have been the appropriate 
words to use if someone had ventured to make improper suggestions and 
had forgotten ‘to close his meat-shop.’ The allusions underlying the inci- 
dent with the vegetable-seller were a further confirmation that our inter- 
pretation was on the right track. A vegetable that is sold tied up in bundles 
(lengthways, as the patient added afterwards) and is also black, could only 
be a dream-combination of asparagus and black (Spanish) radishes. No 
knowledgeable person of either sex will ask for an interpretation of aspara- 
gus. But the other vegetable — ‘ Schwarzer Rettig [‘black radish’] — can be 
taken as an exclamation — ‘Schwarzer, rett’ dich!’ [‘Blacky! Be off!’] — 2 , and 
accordingly it too seems to hint at the same sexual topic which we sus- 
pected at the very beginning, when we felt inclined to introduce the phrase 
about the meat-shop being closed into the original account of the dream. 
We need not enquire now into the full meaning of the dream. So much is 
quite clear: it had a meaning and that meaning was far from innocent . 3 


1 [This passage is referred to in a footnote to a discussion of childhood memories 
in Section V of Freud’s case history of the ‘Wolf Man’ (1918^).] 

2 [It seems probable that this is a reminiscence of a picture puzzle or rebus of the 
kind so common in the pages of Fliegende Blatter and similar comic papers.] 

3 If anyone is curious to know, I may add that the dream concealed a phantasy of 
my behaving in an improper and sexually provocative manner, and of the patient 
putting up a defence against my conduct. If this interpretation seems incredible, 
I need only point to the numerous instances in which doctors have charges of the 
same kind brought against them by hysterical women. But in such cases the 
phantasy emerges into consciousness undisguised and in the form of a delusion, 
instead of being distorted and appearing only as a dream . — \Added 1909:] This 
dream occurred at the beginning of the patient’s psycho-analytic treatment. It was 




208 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


ii 

Here is another innocent dream, dreamt by the same patient, and in a 
sense a counterpart to the last one. Her husband asked her: ‘Don’t you think 
we ought to have the piano tuned?’ And she replied: ‘ It’s not worth while; the 
hammers need reconditioning in any case.’ 

Once again this was a repetition of a real event of the previous day. Her 
husband had asked this question and she had made some such reply. But 
what was the explanation of her dreaming it? She told me that the piano was 
a disgusting old box , that it made an ugly noise , that it had been in her hus- 
band’s possession before their marriage , 1 and so on. But the key to the solu- 
tion was only given by her words: ‘ It’s not worth while.’ These were derived 
from a visit she had paid the day before to a woman friend. She had been in- 
vited to take olfher jacket, but had refused with the words: ‘Thank you, but 
it’s not ivorth while-, I can only stop a minute.’ As she was telling me this, I 
recollected that during the previous day’s analysis she had suddenly caught 
hold of her jacket, one of the buttons having come undone. Thus it was as 
though she were saying: ‘Please don’t look; it’s not worth while.’ In the same 
way ‘box’ [Hasten] was a substitute for a ‘chest’ [‘ Brustkasten’}-, and the inter- 
pretation of the dream led us back at once to the time of her physical devel- 
opment at puberty, when she had begun to be dissatisfied by her figure. We 
can hardly doubt that it led back to still earlier times, if we take the word ‘dis- 
gusting into account and the ‘ugly noise,’ and if we remember how often — 
both in doubles entendres and in dreams — the lesser hemispheres of a woman’s 
body are used, whether as contrasts or as substitutes, for the larger ones. 


in 

I will interrupt this series for a moment and insert a short innocent 
dream produced by a young man. He dreamt that he was putting on his win- 
ter overcoat once more, which was a dreadful thing. The ostensible reason for 


not until later that I learnt that she had been repeating in it the initial trauma 
from which her neurosis had arisen. I have since then come across the same be- 
haviour in other patients; having been exposed to a sexual assault in their child- 
hood, they seek, as it were, to bring about a repetition of it in their dreams. 

1 This last was a substitute for the opposite idea, as the course of the analysis will 
make clear. 




A. Recent and Indifferent Material 


209 


this dream was a sudden return of cold weather. If we look more closely, 
however, we shall notice that the two short pieces that make up the dream 
are not in complete harmony. For what could there be ‘dreadful’ about put- 
ting on a heavy or thick overcoat in cold weather? Moreover, the innocence 
of the dream was decidedly upset by the first association that occurred to 
the dreamer in the analysis. He recalled that a lady confided to him the day 
before that her youngest child owed its existence to a torn condom. On that 
basis he was able to reconstruct his thoughts. A thin condom was danger- 
ous, but a thick one was bad. The condom was suitably represented as an 
overcoat, since one slips into both of them. But an occurrence such as the 
lady described to him would certainly be ‘dreadful’ for an unmarried man. 

And now let us return, to our innocent lady dreamer. 


IV 

She was putting a candle into a candlestick; but the candle broke so that 
it woiddn ’t stand up properly. The girls at her school said she was clumsy; but 
the mistress said it was not her fault. 

Yet again the occasion for the dream was a real event. The day before she 
had actually put a candle into a candlestick, though it did not break. Some 
transparent symbolism was being used in this dream. A candle is an object 
which can excite the female genitals; and, if it is broken, so that it cannot 
stand up properly, it means that the man is impotent. (‘It ivas not her fault.’) 
But could a carefully brought-up young woman, who had been screened 
from the impact of anything ugly, have known that a candle might be put 
to such a use? As it happened, she was able to indicate how it was that she 
obtained this piece of knowledge. Once when they were in a rowing boat 
on the Rhine, another boat had passed them with some students in it. They 
were in high spirits and were singing, or rather shouting, a song: 

Wenn die Konigin von Schweden, 

Bei geschlossenen Fensterladen 
Mit Apollokerzen . . .' 


1 [‘When the Queen of Sweden, behind closed shutters, . . . with Apollo candles.’ 
‘Apollo candles’ was the trade name of a familiar brand of candles. This is an ex- 
tract from a well-known students’ song, which has innumerable similar stanzas. 
The missing word is ‘ onaniert ’ (‘masturbates’).] 




210 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


She either failed to hear or did not understand the last word and had to 
get her husband to give her the necessary explanation. The verse was re- 
placed in the content of the dream by an innocent recollection of some 
job she had done clumsily when she was at school, and the replacement 
was made possible owing to the common element of closed shutters. The 
connection between the topics of masturbation and impotence is obvious 
enough. The ‘Apollo’ in the latent content of this dream linked it with 
an earlier one in which the virgin Pallas figured. Altogether far from 
innocent. 


v 

In order that we may not be tempted to draw conclusions too easily 
from dreams as to the dreamer’s actual life, I will add one more dream of 
the same patient’s, which once more has an innocent appearance. ‘/ 
dreamt,' she said, ‘ ofivhatlreally did yesterday: I filled a small trunk so full 
of books that I had difficulty in shutting it and I dreamt just what really hap- 
pened. ’ In this instance the narrator herself laid the chief emphasis on the 
agreement between the dream and reality. [Cf. pp. 54 n. 2 and 384.] All 
such judgements on a dream and comments upon it, though they have 
made themselves a place in waking thought, invariably form in fact part 
of the latent content of the dream, as we shall find confirmed by other ex- 
amples later on [pp. 453 ff.]. What we were being told, then, was that 
what the dream described had really happened the day before. It would 
take up too much space to explain how it was that the idea occurred to 
me of making use of the English language in the interpretation. It is 
enough to say that once again what was in question was a little ‘box’ (cf. 
the dream of the dead child in the ‘case,’ pp. 177 f.) which was so full that 
nothing more could get into it. Anyhow nothing bad this time. 

In all of these ‘innocent’ dreams the motive for the censorship is obvi- 
ously the sexual factor. This, however, is a subject of prime importance 
which I must leave on one side. 



B. Infantile Material 


211 


(B) 

INFANTILE MATERIAL AS A SOURCE OF DREAMS 

Like every other writer on the subject, with the exception of Robert, I 
have pointed out as a third peculiarity of the content of dreams that it 
may include impressions which date back to earliest childhood, and 
which seem not to be accessible to waking memory. It is naturally hard to 
determine how rarely or how frequently this occurs, since the origin of 
the dream-elements in question is not recognized after waking. Proof that 
what we are dealing with are impressions from childhood must therefore 
be established by external evidence and there is seldom an opportunity 
for doing this. A particularly convincing example is that given by Maury 
[1878, 143 f., quoted on p. 49 above] of the man who determined one 
day to revisit his old home after an absence of more than twenty years. 
During the night before his departure he dreamt that he was in a totally 
unknown place and there met an unknown man in the street and had a 
conversation with him. When he reached his home, he found that the 
unknown place was a real one in the immediate neighbourhood of his na- 
tive town, and the unknown man in the dream turned out to be a friend 
of his dead father’s who was still living there. This was conclusive evi- 
dence that he had seen both the man and the place in his childhood. This 
dream is also to be interpreted as a dream of impatience like that of the 
girl with the concert-ticket in her pocket (pp. 176 ff.), that of the child 
whose father had promised to take her on an excursion to the Hameau 
(cf. pp. 153 f.), and similar ones. The motives which led the dreamers to 
reproduce one particular impression from their childhood rather than any 
other cannot, of course, be discovered without an analysis. 

Someone who attended a course of lectures of mine and boasted that 
his dreams very seldom underwent distortion reported to me that not long 
before he had dreamt of seeing his former tutor in bed with the nurse who 
had been with his family till his eleventh year. In the dream he had identi- 
fied the locality where the scene occurred. His interest had been aroused 
and he had reported the dream to his elder brother, who had laughingly 
confirmed the truth of what he had dreamt. His brother remembered it 
very well, as he had been six years old at the time. The lovers had been in 



212 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


the habit of making the elder boy drunk with beer, whenever circum- 
stances were favourable for intercourse during the night. The younger 
boy — the dreamer — who was then three years old and slept in the room 
with the nurse, was not regarded as an impediment. [See also p. 23 1 .] 

There is another way in which it can be established with certainty 
without the assistance of interpretation that a dream contains elements 
from childhood. This is where the dream is of what has been called the 
‘recurrent’ type: that is to say, where a dream was first dreamt in child- 
hood and then constantly reappears from time to time during adult 
sleep. 1 I am able to add to the familiar examples of such dreams a few 
from my own records, though I have never myself experienced one. A 
physician in his thirties told me that from the earliest days of his child- 
hood to the present time a yellow lion frequently appeared in his dreams; 
he was able to give a minute description of it. This lion out of his dreams 
made its appearance one day in bodily form, as a china ornament that 
had long disappeared. The young man then learnt from his mother that 
this object had been his favourite toy during his early childhood, though 
he himself had forgotten the fact. 2 

If we turn now from the manifest content of dreams to the dream- 
thoughts which only analysis uncovers, we find to our astonishment that 
experiences from childhood also play a part in dreams whose content 
would never have led one to suppose it. I owe a particularly agreeable and 
instructive example of a dream of this kind to my respected colleague of 


1 [See above, p. 73 n. Some remarks on ‘recurrent’ dreams will be found in Freud’s 
‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Flysteria’ (1905e), at the end of the syn- 
thesis of Dora’s first dream (Section II). Cf. below, p. 577 n.\ 

1 [The following further dream appeared at this point in the first edition (1900) 
only. A note in Ges. Schriften , 3 (1925), 38, remarks that it was rightly omitted 
in all subsequent editions: ‘Dreams of this sort are of a typical character and cor- 
respond not to memories but to phantasies, whose meaning it is not hard to 
guess.’ Here are the cancelled sentences: ‘One of my women patients dreamt the 
same dream — a scene filled with anxiety — four or five times during her thirty- 
eighth year. She was being pursued, fled into a room, shut the door, and then 
opened it again to take out the key, which was on the outside of the door. She 
had a feeling that if she failed something frightful would happen. She got hold 
of the key, locked the door from the inside and gave a sigh of relief. I cannot say 
to what age we should assign this little scene, in which, of course, she had only 
played the part of an audience.’] 




B. Infantile Material 


213 


the yellow lion. After reading Nansen’s narrative of his polar expedition, 
he had a dream of being in a field of ice and of giving the gallant explorer 
galvanic treatment for an attack of sciatica from which he was suffering. 
In the course of analysing the dream, he thought of a story dating from 
his childhood, which alone, incidentally, made the dream intelligible. 
One day, when he was a child of three or four, he had heard the grown- 
ups talking of voyages of discovery and had asked his father whether that 
was a serious illness. He had evidently confused ‘Reisen [‘voyages’] with 
‘ Reisseri [‘gripes’], and his brothers and sisters saw to it that he never for- 
got this embarrassing mistake. 

There was a similar instance of this when, in the course of my analysis of 
the dream of the monograph on the genus Cyclamen [see above p. 195 £], 
I stumbled upon the childhood memory of my father, when I was a boy 
of five, giving me a book illustrated with coloured plates to destroy. It may 
perhaps be doubted whether this memory really had any share in deter- 
mining the form taken by the content of the dream or whether it was not 
rather that the process of analysis built up the connection subsequently. 
But the copious and intertwined associative links warrant our accepting 
the former alternative: cyclamen — favourite flower — favourite food — 
artichokes; pulling to pieces like an artichoke, leaf by leaf (a phrase con- 
stantly ringing in our ears in relation to the piecemeal dismemberment of 
the Chinese Empire) — herbarium — bookworms, whose favourite food is 
books. Moreover I can assure my readers that the ultimate meaning of the 
dream, which I have not disclosed, is intimately related to the subject of 
the childhood scene. 

In the case of another group of dreams, analysis shows us that the ac- 
tual wish which instigated the dream, and the fulfilment of which is rep- 
resented by the dream, is derived from childhood; so that, to our surprise, 
we find the child and the child’s impulses still living on in the dream. 

At this point I shall once more take up the interpretation of a dream 
which we have already found instructive — the dream of my friend R. being 
my uncle. [See pp. 162 ff.] We have followed its interpretation to the point 
of recognizing clearly as one of its motives my wish to be appointed to a 
professorship; and we explained the affection I felt in the dream for my 
friend R. as a product of opposition and revolt against the slanders upon 
my two colleagues which were contained in the dream-thoughts. The 
dream was one of my own; I may therefore continue its analysis by saying 
that my feelings were not yet satisfied by the solution that had so far been 



214 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


reached. I knew that my waking judgement upon the colleagues who were 
so ill-used in the dream-thoughts would have been a very different one; and 
the force of my wish not to share their fate in the matter of the appoint- 
ment struck me as insufficient to explain the contradiction between my 
waking and dreaming estimates of them. If it was indeed true that my crav- 
ing to be addressed with a different tide was as strong as all that, it showed 
a pathological ambition which I did not recognize in myself and which I 
believed was alien to me. I could not tell how other people who believed 
they knew me would judge me in this respect. It might be that I was really 
ambitious; but, if so, my ambition had long ago been transferred to objects 
quite other than the title and rank of professor extraordinarius. 

What, then, could have been the origin of the ambitiousness which 
produced the dream in me? At that point I recalled an anecdote I had often 
heard repeated in my childhood. At the time of my birth an old peasant- 
woman had prophesied to my proud mother that with her first-born child 
she had brought a great man into the world. Prophecies of this kind must 
be very common: there are so many mothers filled with happy expecta- 
tions and so many old peasant-women and others of the kind who make 
up for the loss of their power to control things in the present world by 
concentrating it on the future. Nor can the prophetess have lost anything 
by her words. Could this have been the source of my thirst for grandeur? 
But that reminded me of another experience, dating from my later child- 
hood, which provided a still better explanation. My parents had been in 
the habit, when I was a boy of eleven or twelve, of taking me with them to 
the Prater . 1 One evening, while we were sitting in a restaurant there, our 
attention had been attracted by a man who was moving from one table to 
another and, for a small consideration, improvising a verse upon any topic 
presented to him. I was despatched to bring the poet to our table and he 
showed his gratitude to the messenger. Before enquiring what the chosen 
topic was to be, he had dedicated a few lines to myself; and he had been 
inspired to declare that I should probably grow up to be a Cabinet Minis- 
ter. I still remembered quite well what an impression this second prophecy 
had made on me. Those were the days of the ‘ Burger Ministry . 2 Shortly 
before, my father had brought home portraits of these middle-class profes- 


1 [The famous park on the outskirts of Vienna.] 

1 [The ‘Middle-class Ministry’ — a government of liberal complexion, elected after 
the new Austrian constitution was established in 1867.] 




B. Infantile Material 


215 


sional men — Herbst, Giskra, Unger, Berger and the rest — and we had il- 
luminated the house in their honour. There had even been some Jews 
among them. So henceforth every industrious Jewish schoolboy carried a 
Cabinet Minister’s portfolio in his satchel. The events of that period no 
doubt had some bearing on the fact that up to a time shortly before I en- 
tered the University it had been my intention to study Law; it was only at 
the last moment that I changed my mind. A ministerial career is definitely 
barred to a medical man. But now to return to my dream. It began to 
dawn on me that my dream had carried me back from the dreary present 
to the cheerful hopes of the days of the ‘ Burger Ministry, and that the wish 
that it had done its best to fulfil was one dating back to those times. In 
mishandling my two learned and eminent colleagues because they were 
Jews, and in treating the one as a simpleton and the other as a criminal, I 
was behaving as though 1 were the Minister, I had put myself in the Min- 
ister’s place. Turning the tables on His Excellency with a vengeance! He 
had refused to appoint me professor extraordinarius and I had retaliated in 
the dream by stepping into his shoes. 1 

In another instance it became apparent that, though the wish which 
instigated the dream was a present-day one, it had received a powerful re- 
inforcement from memories that stretched far back into childhood. What 
I have in mind is a series of dreams which are based upon a longing to 
visit Rome. For a long time to come, no doubt, I shall have to continue 
to satisfy that longing in my dreams; for at the season of the year when it 
is possible for me to travel, residence in Rome must be avoided for rea- 
sons of health. 2 For instance, I dreamt once that I was looking out of a 
railway-carriage window at the Tiber and the Ponte Sant’ Angelo. The 
train began to move off, and it occurred to me that I had not so much as 
set foot in the city. The view that I had seen in my dream was taken from 


1 [In an amusing letter to Fliess of March 11, 1902 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 152), 
Freud tells the story of how he came actually to be appointed to a professorship, 
two years after the publication of this book.] 

2 [ Footnote added 1909:] I discovered long since that it only needs a little courage 
to fulfil wishes which till then have been regarded as unattainable; [ added 1925:] 
and thereafter became a constant pilgrim to Rome. [The correspondence with 
Fliess (Freud, 1950a) gives repeated evidence of the emotional importance to 
Freud of the idea of visiting Rome. He first fulfilled this wish in the summer of 
1901 (Letter 146).] 




216 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


a well-known engraving which I had caught sight of for a moment the 
day before in the sitting-room of one of my patients. Another time some- 
one led me to the top of a hill and showed me Rome half-shrouded in 
mist; it was so far away that I was surprised at my view of it being so clear. 
There was more in the content of this dream than I feel prepared to de- 
tail; but the theme of ‘the promised land seen from afar’ was obvious in 
it. The town which I saw in this way for the first time, shrouded in mist, 
was — Liibeck, and the prototype of the hill was — at Gleichenberg . 1 In a 
third dream I had at last got to Rome, as the dream itself informed me; 
but I was disappointed to find that the scenery was far from being of an 
urban character. There was a narrow stream of dark ivater; on one side of it 
were black cliffs and on the other meadows ivith big ivhite floivers. I noticed 
a Herr Zucker (whom I knew slightly) and determined to ask him the way 
to the city. I was clearly making a vain attempt to see in my dream a city 
which I had never seen in my waking life. Breaking up the landscape in 
the dream into its elements, I found that the white flowers took me to 
Ravenna, which I have visited and which, for a time at least, superseded 
Rome as capital of Italy. In the marshes round Ravenna we found the 
loveliest water-lilies growing in black water. Because we had had such dif- 
ficulty in picking them out of the water, the dream made them grow in 
meadows like the narcissi at our own Aussee. The dark cliff, so close to 
the water, reminded me vividly of the valley of the Tepl near Karlsbad. 

‘ Karlsbad ’ enabled me to explain the curious detail of my having asked 
Herr Zucker the way. The material out of which the dream was woven 
included at this point two of those facetious Jewish anecdotes which con- 
tain so much profound and often bitter worldly wisdom and which we so 
greatly enjoy quoting in our talk and letters . 2 Here is the first one: the 
‘ constitution story. An impecunious Jew had stowed himself away without 
a ticket in the fast train to Karlsbad. He was caught, and each time tickets 
were inspected he was taken out of the train and treated more and more 
severely. At one of the stations on his via dolorosa he met an acquaintance, 
who asked him where he was travelling to. ‘To Karlsbad,’ was his reply, ‘if 


1 [An Austrian spa in Styria, not far from Graz.] 

1 [In a letter to Fliess of June 12, 1897 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 65), Freud mentions 
that he is making a collection of these anecdotes, of which he was to make great 
use in his book on jokes (Freud, 1905c). The first of the present anecdotes is al- 
luded to more than once in his letters, and Rome and Karlsbad come to be iden- 
tified as symbols of unattainable aims (e.g. in Letters 1 12 and 130).] 




B. Infantile Material 


217 


my constitution can stand it.’ My memory then passed on to another 
story: of a Jew who could not speak French and had been recommended 
when he was in Paris to ask the way to the rue Richelieu. Paris itself had 
for many long years been another goal of my longings; and the blissful 
feelings with which I first set foot on its pavement seemed to me a guar- 
antee that others of my wishes would be fulfilled as well. ‘Asking the way,’ 
moreover, was a direct allusion to Rome, since it is well known that all 
roads lead there. Again, the name Zucker [sugar] was once more an allu- 
sion to Karlsbad ; for we are in the habit of prescribing treatment there for 
anyone suffering from the constitutional complaint of diabetes. 1 The in- 
stigation to this dream had been a proposal made by my friend in Berlin 
that we should meet in Prague at Easter. What we were going to discuss 
there would have included something with a further connection with 
‘sugar’ and ‘diabetes.’ 

A fourth dream, which occurred soon after the last one, took me to 
Rome once more. I saw a street-corner before me and was surprised to 
find so many posters in German stuck up there. 2 1 had written to my 
friend with prophetic foresight the day before to say that I thought 
Prague might not be an agreeable place for a German to walk about in. 
Thus the dream expressed at the same time a wish to meet him in Rome 
instead of in a Bohemian town, and a desire, probably dating back to my 
student days, that the German language might be better tolerated in 
Prague. Incidentally, I must have understood Czech in my earliest child- 
hood, for 1 was born in a small town in Moravia which has a Slav popu- 
lation. A Czech nursery rhyme, which I heard in my seventeenth year, 
printed itself on my memory so easily that I can repeat it to this day, 
though I have no notion what it means. Thus there was no lack of con- 
nections with my early childhood in these dreams either. 

It was on my last journey to Italy, which, among other places, took me 
past Lake Trasimene, that finally — after having seen the Tiber and sadly 
turned back when I was only fifty miles from Rome — I discovered the 
way in which my longing for the eternal city had been reinforced by im- 
pressions from my youth. I was in the act of making a plan to by-pass 
Rome next year and travel to Naples, when a sentence occurred to me 


1 [The German word for ‘diabetes’ is ‘ Zuckerkmnkheit’ (‘sugar-disease’).] 

2 [This dream is discussed in a letter to Fliess of December 3, 1897 (Freud, 1950a, 
Letter 77). The meeting in Prague was probably in the early part of the same 
year (see Letter 58, of February 8, 1897).] 




218 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


which I must have read in one of our classical authors: 1 ‘Which of the two, 
it may be debated, walked up and down his study with the greater impa- 
tience after he had formed his plan of going to Rome — Winckelmann, the 
Vice-Principal, or Hannibal, the Commander-in-Chief?’ I had actually 
been following in Hannibal’s footsteps. Like him, I had been fated not to 
see Rome; and he too had moved into the Campagna when everyone had 
expected him in Rome. But Hannibal, whom 1 had come to resemble in 
these respects, had been the favourite hero of my later school days. Like so 
many boys of that age, I had sympathized in the Punic Wars not with the 
Romans but with the Carthaginians. And when, in the higher classes I be- 
gan to understand for the first time what it meant to belong to an alien 
race, and anti-semitic feelings among the other boys warned me that I 
must take up a definite position, the figure of the Semitic general rose still 
higher in my esteem. To my youthful mind Hannibal and Rome symbol- 
ized the conflict between the tenacity of Jewry and the organization of the 
Catholic church. And the increasing importance of the effects of the anti- 
semitic movement upon our emotional life helped to fix the thoughts and 
feelings of those early days. Thus the wish to go to Rome had become in 
my dream-life a cloak and symbol for a number of other passionate wishes. 
Their realization was to be pursued with all the perseverance and single- 
mindedness of the Carthaginian, though their fulfilment seemed at the 
moment just as little favoured by destiny as was Hannibal’s lifelong wish 
to enter Rome. 

At that point I was brought up against the event in my youth whose 
power was still being shown in all these emotions and dreams. I may have 
been ten or twelve years old, when my father began to take me with him 
on his walks and reveal to me in his talk his views upon things in the world 
we live in. Thus it was, on one such occasion, that he told me a story to 
show me how much better things were now than they had been in his 
days. ‘When I was a young man,’ he said, ‘I went for a walk one Saturday 
in the streets of your birthplace; I was well dressed, and had a new fur cap 
on my head. A Christian came up to me and with a single blow knocked 
off my cap into the mud and shouted: “Jew! get off the pavement!”’ ‘And 
what did you do?’ I asked. ‘I went into the roadway and picked up my 
cap,’ was his quiet reply. This struck me as unheroic conduct on the part 


1 [Footnote added 1925:] The author in question must no doubt have been Jean 
Paul. — [His decision to visit Rome was the turning-point in the career of Win- 
ckelmann, the eighteenth-century founder of classical archaeology.] 




B. Infantile Material 


219 


of the big, strong man who was holding the little boy by the hand. I con- 
trasted this situation with another which fitted my feelings better: the 
scene in which Hannibal’s father, Hamilcar Barca, 1 made his boy swear be- 
fore the household altar to take vengeance on the Romans. Ever since that 
time Hannibal had had a place in my phantasies. 

I believe I can trace my enthusiasm for the Carthaginian general a step 
further back into my childhood; so that once more it would only have 
been a question of a transference of an already formed emotional relation 
on to a new object. One of the first books that I got hold of when I had 
learnt to read was Thiers’ history of the Consulate and Empire. I can still 
remember sticking labels on the flat backs of my wooden soldiers with the 
names of Napoleon’s marshals written on them. And at that time my de- 
clared favourite was already Massena (or to give the name its Jewish form, 
Manasseh). 2 3 (No doubt this preference was also partly to be explained by 
the fact that my birthday fell on the same day as his, exactly a hundred 
years later.) ’ Napoleon himself lines up with Hannibal owing to their 
both having crossed the Alps. It may even be that the development of this 
martial ideal is traceable still further back into my childhood: to the times 
when, at the age of three, I was in a close relation, sometimes friendly but 
sometimes warlike, with a boy a year older than myself, and to the wishes 
which the relation must have stirred up in the weaker of us. 4 

The deeper one carries the analysis of a dream, the more often one 
comes upon the track of experiences in childhood which have played a 
part among the sources of that dream’s latent content. 

We have already seen (on p. 53) that a dream very seldom reproduces 
recollections in such a way that they constitute, without abbreviation or 
modification, the whole of its manifest content. Nevertheless there are 
some undoubted instances of this happening: and I can add a few more, 
relating, once more, to childhood scenes. One of my patients was pre- 
sented in a dream with an almost undistorted reproduction of a sexual 


1 [ Footnote added 1909:] In the first edition the name of Hasdrubal appeared in- 
stead: a puzzling mistake, which I have explained in my Psychopathology of Every- 
day Life (1901^), Chapter X (2). 

2 [ Footnote added 1930:] Incidentally, doubts have been thrown on the Marshal’s 
Jewish origin. 

3 [This sentence was added in 1914.] 

4 [A fuller account of this will be found on pp. 433 f. and 488 £] 




220 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


episode, which was at once recognizable as a true recollection. His mem- 
ory of the event had, in fact, never been completely lost in waking life, 
though it had become greatly obscured, and its revival was a consequence 
of work previously done in analysis. At the age of twelve, the dreamer had 
gone to visit a school friend who was laid up in bed, when the latter, by 
what was probably an accidental movement, uncovered his body. At the 
sight of his friend’s genitals, my patient had been overcome by some sort 
of compulsion and had uncovered himself too and caught hold of the 
other’s penis. His friend looked at him with indignation and astonish- 
ment; whereupon, overcome by embarrassment, he let go. This scene was 
repeated in a dream twenty-three years later, including all the details of 
his feelings at the time. It was modified, however, to this extent, that the 
dreamer assumed the passive instead of the active role, while the figure of 
his school-friend was replaced by someone belonging to his contemporary 
life. (See also p. 21 1 f.) 

It is true that as a rule the childhood scene is only represented in the 
dream’s manifest content by an allusion, and has to be arrived at by an in- 
terpretation of the dream. Such instances, when they are recorded, cannot 
carry much conviction, since as a rule there is no other evidence of these 
childhood experiences having occurred: if they date back to a very early 
age they are no longer recognized as memories. The general justification 
for inferring the occurrence of these childhood experiences from dreams is 
provided by a whole number of factors in psycho-analytic work, which are 
mutually consistent and thus seem sufficiently trustworthy. If I record 
some of these inferred childhood experiences torn from their context for 
the purposes of dream-interpretation, they may perhaps create little im- 
pression, especially as I shall not even be able to quote all the material on 
which the interpretations were based. Nevertheless I shall not allow this to 
deter me from relating them. 


i 

All the dreams of one of my women patients were characterized by her 
being ‘rushed’; she would be in a violent rush to get somewhere in time 
not to miss a train, and so on. In one dream she was going to call on a 
woman friend; her mother told her to take a cab and not to walk; but she ran 
instead and kept on falling down. — The material which came up in analy- 
sis led to memories of rushing about and romping as a child. One partic- 



B. Infantile Material 


221 


ular dream recalled the favourite children’s game of saying a sentence ‘ Die 
Kuh rannte, bis sie fiel’ [‘The cow ran till it fell’] so quickly that it sounds 
as though it were a single [nonsensical] word — another rush in fact. All 
these innocent rushings-about with little girl friends were remembered 
because they took the place of other, less innocent ones. 


ii 

Here is another woman patient’s dream: She was in a big room in 
which all sorts of machines were standing, like ivhat she imagined an or- 
thopaedic institute to be. She was told I had no time and that she must have 
her treatment at the same time as five others. She refused, hoivever, and ivould 
not lie down in the bed — or whatever it was — that was meant for her. She 
stood in the corner and waited for me to say it ivasn ’t true. Meanwhile the 
others were laughing at her and saying it iv as just her way of ‘carrying on. ’ — 
Simultaneously, it was as though she was making a lot of small squares. 

The first part of the content of this dream related to the treatment and 
was a transference on to me. The second part contained an allusion to a 
scene in childhood. The two parts were linked together by the mention 
of the bed. 

The orthopaedic institute referred back to a remark I had made in which 
I had compared the treatment, alike in its length and in its nature, to an 
orthopaedic one. When I started her treatment I had been obliged to tell 
her that for the time being I had not much time for her, though later I 
should be able to give her a whole hour daily. This had stirred up her old 
sensitiveness, which is a principal trait in the character of children inclined 
to hysteria: they are insatiable for love. My patient had been the youngest 
of a family of six children (hence: at the same time as five others) and had 
therefore been her father’s favourite; but even so she seems to have felt that 
her adored father devoted too little of his time and attention to her. — Her 
waiting for me to say it wasn’t true had the following origin. A young tai- 
lor’s apprentice had brought her a dress and she had given him the money 
for it. Afterwards she had asked her husband whether if the boy lost the 
money she would have to pay it over again. Her husband, to tease her, had 
said that was so. (The teasing in the dream.) She kept on asking over and 
over again and ivaited for him to say after all it ivasn ’t true. It was then pos- 
sible to infer that in the latent content of the dream she had had a thought 
of whether she would have to pay me twice as much if I gave her twice as 



222 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


much time — a thought which she felt was avaricious or filthy. (Uncleanli- 
ness in childhood is often replaced in dreams by avariciousness for money; 
the link between the two is the word ‘filthy.’ 1 ) If the whole passage about 
waiting for me to say, etc., was intended in the dream as a circumlocution 
for the word ‘filthy,’ then her ‘ standing in the corner and ‘ not lying down 
in the bed' would fit in with it as constituents of a scene from her child- 
hood: a scene in which she had dirtied her bed and been punished by be- 
ing made to stand in the corner, with a threat that her father would not 
love her any more and her brothers and sisters would laugh at her, and so 
on. — The small squares related to her little niece, who had shown her the 
arithmetical trick of arranging the digits in nine squares (I believe this is 
correct) so that they add up in all directions to fifteen. 


in 

A man dreamt as follows: He saw two boys struggling — barrel-maker’s 
boys, to judge by the implements lying around. One of the boys threiv the other 
down; the boy on the ground had earrings with blue stones. He hurried to- 
wards the offender with his stick raised, to chastise him. The latter fled for 
protection to a woman, who was standing by a wooden fence, as though she 
was his mother. She ivas a woman of the working classes and her back was 
turned to the dreamer. At last she turned round and gave him a terrible look 
so that he ran off in terror. The red flesh of the lower lids of her eyes coidd be 
seen standing out. 

The dream had made copious use of trivial events of the previous day. 
He had in fact seen two boys in the street, one of whom threw the other 
down. When he hurried up to stop the fight they had both taken to their 
heels. — Barrel-maker’s boys. This was only explained by a subsequent 
dream in which he used the phrase ‘knocking the bottom out of a barrel .’ — 
From his experience he believed that earrings with bltie stones were mostly 
worn by prostitutes. A line from a well-known piece of doggerel about 
two boys then occurred to him: ‘The other boy was called Marie’ (i.e. was 
a girl). — The woman standing. After the scene with the two boys he had 
gone for a walk along the bank of the Danube and had profited by the 
loneliness of the spot to micturate against a wooden fence. Further on, a 


1 [This point was later enlarged upon by Freud (1908£). But it already occurs in 
a letter to Fliess of December 22, 1897 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 79).] 



B. Infantile Material 


223 


respectably dressed elderly lady had smiled at him in a very friendly man- 
ner and had wanted to give him her visiting-card. Since the woman in the 
dream was standing in the same position as he had been in when he was 
micturating, it must have been a question of a micturating woman. This 
tallies with her terrible look and the red flesh standing out, which could 
only relate to the gaping of the genitals caused by stooping. This, seen in 
his childhood, reappeared, in later memory as ‘ proud flesh ’ — as a wound. 

The dream combined two opportunities he had had as a little boy of 
seeing little girls’ genitals: when they were thrown down and when they 
were micturating. And from the other part of the context it emerged that 
he had a recollection of being chastised or threatened by his father for the 
sexual curiosity he had evinced on these occasions. 


IV 

Behind the following dream (dreamt by an elderly lady) there lay a 
whole quantity of childhood memories, combined, as best they might be, 
into a single phantasy. 

She went out in a violent rush to do some commissions. In the Graben 1 she 
sank doiun on her knees, as though she was quite broken-down. A large num- 
ber of people collected round her, especially cab-drivers; but no one helped her 
up. She made several vain attempts, and she must at last have succeeded, for 
she was put into a cab ivhich was to take her home. Someone threiv a big, 
heavily-laden basket (like a shopping-basket j in through the window after her. 

This was the same lady who always felt ‘rushed’ in her dreams, just as 
she had rushed and romped about when she was a child. [See above, 
p. 220 £] The first scene in the dream was evidently derived from the sight 
of a horse fallen down; in the same way the word ‘broken-down referred 
to horse-racing. In her youth she had ridden horses, and no doubt when 
she was still younger she had actually been a horse. The falling down was 
related to a memory from very early childhood of the seventeen-year-old 
son of the house-porter who had fallen down in the street in an epileptic 
fit and been brought home in a carriage. She had of course only heard 
about this, but the idea of epileptic fits (of the falling sickness’) had ob- 
tained a hold on her imagination and had later influenced the form taken 
by her own hysterical attacks. — If a woman dreams of falling, it almost 


1 [One of the principal shopping centres in Vienna.] 




224 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


invariably has a sexual sense: she is imagining herself as a ' fallen ivoman.’ 
The present dream in particular scarcely left any room for doubt, since the 
place where my patient fell was the Graben, a part of Vienna notorious as 
a promenade for prostitutes. The shopping-basket \Korb\ led to more than 
one interpretation. It reminded her of the numerous rebuffs [ Korbe ] 1 which 
she had dealt out to her suitors, as well as of those which she complained 
of having later received herself. This also connected with the fact that no 
one helped her up, which she herself explained as a rebuff. The shopping- 
basket further reminded her of phantasies which had already come up in 
her analysis, in which she was married far beneath her and had to go mar- 
keting herself. And lastly it might serve as the mark of a servant. At this 
point further childhood recollections emerged. First, of a cook who had 
been dismissed for stealing, and who had fallen on her knees and begged to 
be forgiven. She herself had been twelve at the time. Then, of a housemaid 
who had been dismissed on account of a love-affair with the family coach- 
man (who incidentally married her subsequently). Thus this memory was 
also one of the sources of the coachmen {drivers ) 2 in the dream (who, in 
contradistinction to the actual coachman, failed to raise the fallen 
woman). There remained to be explained the fact of the basket being 
thrown in afier her and through the ivindoiv. This reminded her of handing 
in luggage to be sent off hy rail, of the country custom of lovers climbing 
in through their sweethearts’ window, and of other little episodes from her 
life in the country: how a gentleman had thrown some blue plums to a lady 
through the window of her room, and how her own younger sister had been 
scared by the village idiot looking in through her window. An obscure 
memory from her tenth year then began to emerge, of a nurse in the coun- 
try who had had love-scenes (which the girl might have seen something 
of) with one of the servants in the house and who, along with her lover, 
had been sent off thrown out (the opposite of the dream-image ‘ thrown 
in ) — a story that we had already approached from several other direc- 
tions. A servant’s luggage or trunk is referred to contemptuously in Vienna 
as ‘seven plums’-, ‘pack up your seven plums and out you go!’ 

My records naturally include a large collection of patients’ dreams the 
analysis of which led to obscure or entirely forgotten impressions of child- 


1 [The word ‘ Korb ’ (‘basket’) is commonly used for the rejection of an offer of 
marriage.] 

1 [The German word is the same ( Kutscher ) in both cases.] 




B. Infantile Material 


225 


hood, often going back to the first three years of life. But it would be un- 
safe to apply any conclusions drawn from them to dreams in general. The 
persons concerned were in every instance neurotics and in particular hys- 
terics; and it is possible that the part played by childhood scenes in their 
dreams might be determined by the nature of their neurosis and not by the 
nature of dreams. Nevertheless, in analysing my own dreams — and, after 
all, I am not doing so on account of any gross pathological symptoms — it 
happens no less frequently that in the latent content of a dream I come un- 
expectedly upon a scene from childhood, and that all at once a whole se- 
ries of my dreams link up with the associations branching out from some 
experience of my childhood. I have already given some instances of this 
[pp. 215-19], and I shall have others to give in a variety of connections. I 
cannot, perhaps, bring this section to a better close than by reporting one 
or two dreams of mine in which recent occasions and long-forgotten ex- 
periences of childhood came together as sources of the dream. 


i 

Tired and hungry after a journey, I went to bed, and the major vital 
needs began to announce their presence in my sleep; I dreamt as follows: 

/ went into a kitchen in search of some pudding. Three women were stand- 
ing in it; one of them was the hostess of the inn and was twisting something 
about in her hands, as though she was making Ktiodel [ dumplings ]. She an- 
swered that I must wait till she was ready. (These were not definite spoken 
words.) / felt impatient and went off with a sense of injury. I put on an over- 
coat. But the first I tried on was too long for me. I took it off, rather surprised 
to find it was trimmed with fur. A second one that I put on had a long strip 
with a Turkish design let into it. A stranger with a long face and a short 
pointed beard came up and tried to prevent my putting it on, saying it was 
his. I showed him then that it was embroidered all over with a Turkish pat- 
tern. He asked: ‘What have the Turkish (designs, stripes . . .) to do with you?’ 
But we then became quite friendly with each other. 

When 1 began analysing this dream, I thought quite unexpectedly of 
the first novel I ever read (when I was thirteen, perhaps); as a matter of fact 
I began at the end of the first volume. I have never known the name of the 
novel or of its author; but I have a vivid memory of its ending. The hero 
went mad and kept calling out the names of the three women who had 
brought the greatest happiness and sorrow into his life. One of these 



226 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


names was Pelagie. I still had no notion what this recollection was going 
to lead to in the analysis. In connection with the three women I thought 
of the three Fates who spin the destiny of man, and I knew that one of the 
three women — the inn-hostess in the dream — was the mother who gives 
life, and furthermore (as in my own case) gives the living creature its first 
nourishment. Love and hunger, 1 reflected, meet at a woman’s breast. A 
young man who was a great admirer of feminine beauty was talking 
once — so the story went — of the good-looking wet-nurse who had suckled 
him when he was a baby: ‘I’m sorry,’ he remarked, ‘that I didn’t make a 
better use of my opportunity.’ 1 was in the habit of quoting this anecdote 
to explain the factor of ‘deferred action’ in the mechanism of the psy- 
choneuroses. 1 2 — One of the Fates, then, was rubbing the palms of her 
hands together as though she was making dumplings: a queer occupation 
for a Fate, and one that cried out for an explanation. This was provided by 
another and earlier memory of my childhood. When I was six years old 
and was given my first lessons by my mother, I was expected to believe that 
we were all made of earth and must therefore return to earth. This did not 
suit me and I expressed doubts of the doctrine. My mother thereupon 
rubbed the palms of her hands together — just as she did in making 
dumplings, except that there was no dough between them — and showed 
me the blackish scales of epidermis produced by the friction as a proof that 
we were made of earth. My astonishment at this ocular demonstration 
knew no bounds and I acquiesced in the belief which I was later to hear 
expressed in the words: ‘ Du bist der Natur einen Tod schiddig.’ 1 So they 
really were Fates that I found in the kitchen when I went into it — as I had 
so often done in my childhood when I was hungry, while my mother, 
standing by the fire, had admonished me that I must wait till dinner was 


1 [A reference to a superseded theory of the mechanism of hysteria, described in 
the later sections of Part II of Freud’s early ‘Project for a Scientific Psychology’ 
(Freud, 1950a).] 

2 [‘Thou owest Nature a death.’ Evidently a reminiscence of Prince Hal’s remark 
to Falstaff in 1 Henry IV, v. 1: ‘Thou owest God a death.’ Freud uses the same 
words and ascribes them to Shakespeare in a letter to Fliess of February 6, 1899 
(Freud, 1950a, Letter 104).] — Both of the emotions that were attached to these 
childhood scenes — astonishment and submission to the inevitable — had oc- 
curred in a dream which I had had shortly before this one and which had first 
reminded me of this event in my childhood. 




B. Infantile Material 


227 


ready. — And now for the dumplings — the Knodel! One at least of my 
teachers at the University — and precisely the one to whom I owe my his- 
tological knowledge (for instance of the epidermis ) would infallibly be re- 
minded by the name Knodl of a person against whom he had been obliged 
to take legal action for plagiarizingblis writings. The idea of plagiarizing — 
of appropriating whatever one can, even though it belongs to someone 
else — clearly led on to the second part of the dream, in which I was treated 
as though I were the thief who had for some time carried on his business 
of stealing overcoats in the lecture-rooms. I had written down the word 
‘plagiarizing,’ without thinking about it, because it occurred to me; but 
now I noticed that it could form a bridge [Briicke] between different pieces 
of the dream’s manifest content. A chain of associations ( Pelagie — 
plagiarizing — plagiostomes 1 or sharks [ Haifische ] — a fish’s swimming-bladder 
[ Fischblase ]) connected the old novel with the case of Knodl and with the 
overcoats, which clearly referred to implements used in sexual technique 
[see p. 208 f.]. (Cf. Maury’s alliterative dreams [on pp. 87 £].) No doubt it 
was a very far-fetched and senseless chain of thought; but I could never 
have constructed it in waking life unless it had already been constructed by 
the dream-work. And, as though the need to set up forced connections re- 
garded nothing as sacred, the honoured name of Briicke I 2 (cf. the verbal 
bridge above) reminded me of the Institute in which I spent the happiest 
hours of my student life, free from all other desires — 

So wird’s Euch an der Weisheit Brusten 

Mit jedem Tage mehr geltisten 3 

— in complete contrast to the desires which were now plaguing me in my 
dreams. Finally there came to mind another much respected teacher — his 
name, Fleischl [‘ Fleisch ’ = ‘meat’], like Knodl, sounded like something to 


i 


2 

3 


I have deliberately avoided enlarging upon the plagiostomes; they reminded me 
of an unpleasant occasion on which I had disgraced myself in connection with 
this same University teacher. 

[For Briicke and Fleischl (below) see footnote, p. 487.] 

[‘Thus, at the breasts of Wisdom clinging, 

Thou’lt find each day a greater rapture bringing.’ 

Goethe, Faust , Part I, [Scene 4] 
(Bayard Taylor’s translation).] 




228 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


eat — and a distressing scene in which scales of epidermis played a part (my 
mother and the inn-hostess) as well as madness (the novel) and a drug 
from the dispensary 1 which removes hunger: cocaine. 

I might pursue the intricate trains of thought further along these lines 
and explain fully the part of the dream which I have not analysed; but I 
must desist at this point because the personal sacrifice demanded would 
be too great. I will only pick out one thread, which is qualified to lead us 
straight to one of the dream-thoughts underlying the confusion. The 
stranger with the long face and pointed beard who tried to prevent my 
putting on the overcoat bore the features of a shop-keeper at Spalato from 
whom my wife had bought a quantity of Turkish stuffs. He was called 
Popovic, an equivocal name, 2 on which a humorous writer, Stettenheim, 
has already made a suggestive comment: ‘He told me his name and blush- 
ingly pressed my hand.’ Once again I found myself misusing a name, as I 
already had done with Pelagie, Knodl, Briicke and Fleischl. It could 
scarcely be denied that playing about with names like this was a kind of 
childish naughtiness. But if I indulged in it, it was as an act of retribution; 
for my own name had been the victim of feeble witticisms like these on 
countless occasions. 3 Goethe, 1 recalled, had remarked somewhere upon 
people’s sensitiveness about their names: how we seem to have grown into 
them like our skin. He had said this h propos of a line written on his name 
by Herder: 

‘Der du von Gottern abstammst, von Gothen oder vom 

Kote.’ — ‘So seid ihr Gotterbilder auch zu Staub.’ 4 

I noticed that my digression on the subject of the misuse of names was 
only leading up to this complaint. But I must break off here. — My wife’s 


1 [In German ‘ lateinische Kiiche’ (literally, 'Latin kitchen’). — Cf. footnote 1, p. 136.] 

2 [‘Popo’ is a childish word for ‘bottom.’] 

3 'Freud’ is the German word for ‘joy.’] 

4 [The first of these lines comes from a facetious note written by Herder to Goethe 
with a request for the loan of some books: ‘Thou who art the offspring of gods 
or of Goths or of dung — (Goethe, send them to me!)’ The second line, a further 
free association of Freud’s, is taken from the well-known recognition scene in 
Goethe’s Iphigenie aufTauris. Iphigenia, hearing from Pylades of the death of so 
many heroes during the siege of Troy, exclaims: ‘So you too, divine figures, have 
turned to dust!’] 




B. Infantile Material 


229 


purchase made at Spalato reminded me of another purchase, made at 
Cattaro, 1 which I had been too cautious over, so that I had lost an oppor- 
tunity of making some nice acquisitions. (Cf. the neglected opportunity 
with the wet-nurse.) For one of the thoughts which my hunger intro- 
duced into the dream was this: ‘One should never neglect an opportunity, 
but always take what one can even when it involves doing a small wrong. 
One should never neglect an opportunity, since life is short and death in- 
evitable.’ Because this lesson of ‘carpe diem had among other meanings a 
sexual one, and because the desire it expressed did not stop short of doing 
wrong, it had reason to dread the censorship and was obliged to conceal 
itself behind a dream. All kinds of thoughts having a contrary sense then 
found voice: memories of a time when the dreamer was content with spir- 
itual food, restraining thoughts of every kind and even threats of the most 
revolting sexual punishments. 


II 

The next dream calls for a rather long preamble: 

I had driven to the Western Station [in Vienna] to take the train for my 
summer holiday at Aussee, but had arrived on the platform while an earlier 
train, going to Ischl, was still standing in the station. There I had seen 
Count Thun 2 who was once again travelling to Ischl for an audience with 
the Emperor. Though it was raining, he had arrived in an open carriage. He 
had walked straight in through the entrance for the Local Trains. The ticket 
inspector at the gate had not recognized him and had tried to take his 
ticket, but he had waved the man aside with a curt motion of his hand and 
without giving any explanation. After the train for Ischl had gone out, 1 
ought by rights to have left the platform again and returned to the waiting 
room; and it had cost me some trouble to arrange matters so that I was al- 
lowed to stop on the platform. 1 had passed the time in keeping a look-out 
to see if anyone came along and tried to get a reserved compartment by ex- 
ercising some sort of ‘pull.’ 1 had intended in that case to make a loud 


1 [Spalato and Cattaro: both towns on the Dalmatian coast.] 

2 [Austrian politician (1847-1916) of reactionary views; an upholder of Bo- 
hemian self-government as against the German nationalists; Austrian premier 
1898-9. — Ischl, in Upper Austria, where the Court regularly spent the summer 
months.] 




230 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


protest: that is to say to claim equal rights. Meantime I had been humming 
a tune to myself which I recognized as Figaro’s aria from Le Nozze di Figaro: 

Se vuol ballare, signor contino, 

Se vuol ballare, signor contino, 

II chitarino le suonero 1 

(It is a little doubtful whether anyone else would have recognized the tune.) 

The whole evening I had been in high spirits and in a combative 
mood. I had chaffed my waiter and my cab-driver — without, I hope, 
hurting their feelings. And now all kinds of insolent and revolutionary 
ideas were going through my head, in keeping with Figaro’s words and 
with my recollections of Beaumarchais’ comedy which I had seen acted 
by the Comedie frangaise. I thought of the phrase about the great gentle- 
men who had taken the trouble to be born, and of the droit du Seigneur 
which Count Almaviva tried to exercise over Susanna. I thought, too, of 
how our malicious opposition journalists made jokes over Count Thun’s 
name, calling him instead ‘Count Nichtsthun .’ 2 Not that I envied him. 
He was on his way to a difficult audience with the Emperor, while / was 
the real Count Do-nothing — just off on my holidays. There followed all 
sorts of enjoyable plans for the holidays. At this point a gentleman came 
on to the platform whom I recognized as a Government invigilator at 
medical examinations, and who by his activities in that capacity had won 
the flattering nickname of ‘Government bedfellow .’ 3 He asked to be given 
a first-class half-compartment to himself in virtue of his official position, 
and I heard one railwayman saying to another: ‘Where are we to put the 
gentleman with the half first-class ticket ?’ 4 This, I thought to myself, was 
a fine example of privilege; after all / had paid the full first-class fare. And 
I did in fact get a compartment to myself, but not in a corridor coach, so 
that there would be no lavatory available during the night. I complained 
to an official without any success; but I got my own back on him by sug- 


1 [‘If my Lord Count is inclined to go dancing, 

If my Lord Count is inclined to go dancing, 

I’ll be quite ready to play him a tune . . .’] 

1 [‘Count Do-nothing.’ ‘Thun is the German word for ‘to do.’] 

3 [‘ Beischldfer,’ literally ‘one who sleeps with someone’ because he used to go to 
sleep instead of invigilating.] 

4 [Being a government official, he had been able to buy his ticket at half-rates.] 




B. Infantile Material 


231 


gesting that he should at all events have a hole made in the floor of the 
compartment to meet the possible needs of passengers. And in fact I did 
wake up at a quarter to three in the morning with a pressing need to mic- 
turate, having had the following dream: 

A crowd of people, a meeting of students. — A count (Thun or Taaffe 1 ) was 
speaking. He was challenged to say something about the Germans, and de- 
clared with a contemptuous gesture that their favourite flower was colt’s foot, 
and put some sort of dilapidated leaf- — or rather the crumpled skeleton of a 
leaf- — into his buttonhole. I fired up — so I fired up, 2 though I ivas surprised 
at my taking such an attitude. 

(Then, less distinctly:) It was as though I was in the Aula , 3 trances were 
cordoned off and we had to escape. I made my ivay through a series of beauti- 
fully furnished rooms, evidently ministerial or public apartments, with furni- 
ture upholstered in a colour betiveen brown and violet; at last I came to a 
corridor, in ivhich a housekeeper was sitting, an elderly stout ivoman. I 
avoided speaking to her, but she evidently thought I had a right to pass, for 
she asked whether she should accompany me with the lamp. I indicated to her, 
by word or gesture, that she ivas to stop on the staircase; and I felt I was being 
very cunning in thus avoiding inspection at the exit. I got downstairs and 
found a narrow and steep ascending path, along which I went. 

(Becoming indistinct again) ... It ivas as though the second problem was 
to get out of the town, just as the first one had been to get out of the house. I 
ivas driving in a cab and ordered the driver to drive me to a station. 7 can ’t 
drive with you along the railway-line itself, ’ I said, after he had raised some 
objection, as though I had overtired him. It was as if I had already driven with 
him for some of the distance one normally travels by train. The stations were 
cordoned off. I wondered whether to go to Krems or Znaimf but reflected that 


'Austrian politician (1833-95); premier 1870-1 and 1879-93. Like Count 
Thun, he favoured some degree of independence for the non-German parts of 
the Empire.] 

2 This repetition crept into my record of the dream, apparently through inadver- 
tence. I have let it stand, since the analysis showed that it was significant. [The 
German is ‘ich fahre auf’\ fiahren also means ‘to drive’ or ‘to travel’ and is used 
repeatedly in these senses later in the dream. See on this point p. 441 n.\ 

3 [The great ceremonial hall of the University.] 

4 [Krems in Lower Austria and Znaim in Moravia were neither of them Imperial 
residences. — Graz is the capital of the province of Styria.] 




232 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


the Court would be in residence there, so I decided in favour of Graz, or some 
such place. I was now sitting in the compartment, which was like a carriage 
on the Stadtbahn [the suburban railway]; and in my buttonhole I had a 
peculiar plaited, long-shaped object, and beside it some violet-brown violets 
made of a stiff material. This greatly struck people. (At this point the scene 
broke off.) 

Once more I was in front of the station, but this time in the company of 
an elderly gentleman. I thought of a plan for remaining unrecognized; and 
then saiv that this plan had already been put into effect. It was as though 
thinking and experiencing were one and the same thing. He appeared to be 
blind, at all events with one eye, and I handed him a male glass urinal 
( which ive had to buy or had bought in town). So I was a sick-nurse and had 
to give him the urinal because he was blind. If the ticket-collector were to see 
us like that, he ivould be certain to let us get away ivithout noticing us. Here 
the man ’s attitude and his micturating penis appeared in plastic form. (This 
was the point at which I awoke, feeling a need to micturate.) 

The dream as a whole gives one the impression of being in the nature 
of a phantasy in which the dreamer was carried back to the Revolutionary 
year 1848. Memories of that year had been recalled to me by the [Em- 
peror Francis Joseph’s] Jubilee in 1898, as well as by a short trip which I 
had made to the Wachau, in the course of which I had visited Emmers- 
dorf, 1 the place of retirement of the student-leader Fischhof, to whom 
certain elements in the manifest content of the dream may allude. My as- 
sociations then led me to England and to my brother’s house there. He 
used often to tease his wife with the words ‘Fifty Years Ago’ (from the title 
of one of Lord Tennyson’s poems), 2 which his children used then to cor- 
rect to "fifteen years ago.’ This revolutionary phantasy, however, which was 


1 [The Wachau is a stretch of the Danube valley some fifty miles above Vienna. — 
Footnote added 1925:] This is a mistake, but not a slip this time. I only learnt 
later that the Emmersdorf in the Wachau is not to be identified with the place 
of the same name which was the refuge of the revolutionary leader Fischhof. [A 
reference to this mistake will be found in The Psychopathology of Everyday Life 
(Freud, 190 lb), Chapter X (3).] 

2 [No poem by Tennyson seems to bear this title. The reference is perhaps to his 
ode ‘On the Jubilee of Queen Victoria,’ in which the words ‘fifty years’ (though 
not ‘fifty years ago’) occur repeatedly. Or, alternatively, the allusion may be to 
the second 'Locksley Half: ‘Sixty Years After.’] 




B. Infantile Material 


233 


derived from ideas aroused in me by seeing Count Thun, was like the 
facade of an Italian church in having no organic relation with the struc- 
ture lying behind it. But it differed from those facades in being disordered 
and full of gaps, and in the fact that portions of the interior construction 
had forced their way through into it at many points. 

The first situation in the dream was an amalgam of several scenes, 
which I can separate out. The insolent attitude adopted by the Count in 
the dream was copied from a scene at my secondary school when I was 
fifteen years old. We had hatched a conspiracy against an unpopular and 
ignorant master, the moving spirit of which had been one of my school- 
fellows who since those days seemed to have taken Henry VIII of England 
as his model. The leadership in the chief assault was allotted to me, and 
the signal for open revolt was a discussion on the significance of the 
Danube to Austria (cf. the Wachaii). One of our fellow-conspirators had 
been the only aristocratic boy in the class, who, on account of his remark- 
able length of limb, was called ‘the Giraffe.’ He was standing up, like the 
Count in my dream, having been taken to task by the school tyrant, the 
German language master. Th c favourite flower and the putting into his but- 
tonhole of something in the nature of a flower (which last made me think 
of some orchids which I had brought the same day for a woman friend 
and also of a rose of Jericho 1 ) were a striking reminder of the scene in one 
of Shakespeare’s historical plays [3 Henry VI, I. 1] which represented the 
beginning of the Wars of the Red and White Roses. (The mention of 
Henry VIII opened the way to this recollection.) — From there it was only 
a short step to red and white carnations. (Two little couplets, one in Ger- 
man and the other in Spanish, slipped into the analysis at this point: 

Rosen, Tulpen, Nelken, 
alle Blumen welken. 

Isabelita, no llores, 

que se marchitan las flores. 2 

The appearance of a Spanish couplet led back to Figaro .) Here in Vienna 
white carnations had become an emblem of anti-semitism, and red ones 


1 [The ‘Resurrection plant,’ whose dried fronds unfold under moisture.] 

2 [‘Roses, tulips, carnations: every flower fades.’ (Lines often found in nineteenth cen- 
tury ‘common-place books.’) — ‘Isabelita, do not weep because the flowers fade.’] 




234 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


of the Social Democrats. Behind this lay a recollection of a piece of anti- 
semitic provocation during a railway journey in the lovely Saxon coun- 
tryside (cf. Anglo-Saxon) . — The third scene which contributed to the 
formation of the first situation in the dream dated from my early student 
days. There was a discussion in a German students’ club on the relation 
of philosophy to the natural sciences. I was a green youngster, full of ma- 
terialistic theories, and thrust myself forward to give expression to an ex- 
tremely one-sided point of view. Thereupon someone who was my senior 
and my superior, someone who has since then shown his ability as a 
leader of men and an organizer of large groups (and who also, inciden- 
tally, bears a name derived from the Animal Kingdom 1 ), stood up and 
gave us a good talking-to: he too, he told us, had fed swine in his youth 
and returned repentant to his father’s house. I fired, up (as I did in the 
dream) and replied boorishly [‘ saugrob ,’ literally ‘swinishly gross’] that 
since I now knew that he had fed swine in his youth I was no longer sur- 
prised at the tone of his speeches. (In the dream I was surprised at my 
German-nationalist attitude. [Cf. p. 358.]) There was a general uproar 
and I was called upon from many sides to withdraw my remarks, but I re- 
fused to do so. The man 1 had insulted was too sensible to look upon the 
incident as a challenge, and let the affair drop. 

The remaining elements of this first situation in the dream were de- 
rived from deeper layers. What was the meaning of the Count’s pro- 
nouncement about colt’s foot? To find the answer, 1 followed a train of 
associations: colt’s foot [‘ Huflattich,’ literally ‘hoof lettuce’] — lettuce — 
salad — dog-in-the-manger [‘ Salathund,’ literally ‘salad dog’]. Here was a 
whole collection of terms of abuse: ‘Gir-affe’ [‘Affe’ is the German for 
‘ape’], ‘swine,’ ‘dog’ — and I could have arrived at ‘donkey’ if I had made 
a detour through another name and insulted yet another academic 
teacher. Moreover, I translated ‘colt’s foot’ — whether rightly or wrongly 
I could not tell — by the French ‘ pisse-en-lit’ . 1 This information was de- 
rived from Zola’s Germinal, in which a child was told to pick some of 
that plant for salad. The French word for ‘dog’ — ‘ chien — reminded me 
of the major function Itchier in French, compared with ‘pisser for the mi- 
nor one). Soon, I thought, I should have collected examples of impropri- 


1 [Presumably Viktor Adler (‘eagle’), the Austrian Social Democrat leader (1 852 — 
1918). Cf .‘Adler on p. 235 below.] 

1 [‘Pissenlit’ actually means ‘dandelion.’] 




B. Infantile Material 


235 


ety in all three states of matter — solid, liquid and gaseous; — for this same 
book, Germinal, which had plenty to do with the approaching revolution, 
contained an account of a very peculiar sort of competition — for the pro- 
duction of a gaseous excretion known by the name of "flatus.’ 1 I now saw 
that the path leading to flatus had been prepared far ahead: from flowers, 
through the Spanish couplet, Isabelita, Isabella and Ferdinand, Henry VIII, 
English history, and the Armada which sailed against England, after whose 
defeat a medal was struck, bearing the inscription ‘ Flavit et dissipati 
sunt,’ 2 since the stormblast had scattered the Spanish fleet. I had thought, 
half seriously, of using those words as the heading to the chapter on 
‘Therapy,’ if ever I got so far as producing a detailed account of my theory 
and treatment of hysteria. 

Turning now to the second episode of the dream, I am unable to deal 
with it in such detail — out of consideration for the censorship. For I was 
putting myself in the place of an exalted personage of those revolutionary 
times, who also had an adventure with an eagle [Adler] and is said to have 
suffered from incontinence of the bowels, and so on. I thought to myself 
that I should not be justified in passing the censorship at this point, even 
though the greater part of the story was told me by a Hofrat (a consiliarius 
aulicus [court councillor] — cf. Aula). The series of public rooms in the 
dream were derived from His Excellency’s saloon carriage, of which I had 
succeeded in getting a glimpse. But the ‘rooms’ [Zimmer] also meant 
‘women’ [ Frauenzimmer ] as is often the case in dreams 3 — in this instance 
‘public women.’ In the figure of the housekeeper I was showing my lack 
of gratitude towards a witty elderly lady and ill repaying her hospitality 
and the many good stories that I heard while I was stopping in her 


1 Not in fact in Germinal but in La terre\ a mistake which I only observed after I 
had completed the analysis. — Notice the occurrence of the same letters in ‘Hu- 
flattich ’ [‘colt’s foot’] and "flatus.’ 

2 [‘He blew and they were scattered .’ — Footnote added 1925:] An unsolicited bi- 
ographer, Dr. Fritz Wittels [1924, 21; Engl, trans. (1924), 28] has charged me 
with having omitted the name of Jehovah from the above motto. [ Added 1930:] 
The English medallion bears the deity’s name in Hebrew lettering on a cloud in 
the background. It is so placed that it can be taken as being part either of the de- 
sign or of the inscription. — [The idea of using the words as a motto at the head 
of a chapter on therapy is mentioned in a letter to Fliess of January 3, 1897 
(Freud, 1950a, Letter 54).] 

3 [‘ Frauenzimmer! literally ‘women’s apartment,’ is commonly used in German as 
a slightly derogatory word for ‘woman.’ Cf. p. 367.] 



236 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


house. — The allusion to the lamp went back to Grillparzer, 1 2 who intro- 
duced a charming episode of a similar kind, which he had actually experi- 
enced, into his tragedy about Hero and Leander, Des Meeres und der Liebe 
Wellen [‘The Waves of the Sea and of Love’] — the Armada and the storm. 1 

I must also refrain from any detailed analysis of the two remaining 
episodes of the dream. 3 I will merely pick out the elements leading to the 
two childhood scenes on whose account alone I embarked upon a discus- 
sion of this dream. It will rightly be suspected that what compels me to 
make this suppression is sexual material; but there is no need to rest con- 
tent with this explanation. After all, there are many things which one has 
to keep secret from other people but of which one makes no secret to 
oneself; and the question here is not as to why I am obliged to conceal 
the solution but as to the motives for the internal censorship which hid 
the true content of the dream from myself. I must therefore explain that the 
analysis of these three [last] episodes of the dream showed that they were 
impertinent boastings, the issue of an absurd megalomania which had 
long been suppressed in my waking life and a few of whose ramifications 
had even made their way into the dream’s manifest content (e.g. ‘7 felt I 
was being very cunning), and which incidentally accounted for my exu- 
berant spirits during the evening before I had the dream. The boasting 
extended to all spheres; for instance, the mention of Graz went back to 
the slang phrase ‘What’s the price of Graz?’ which expresses the self- 
satisfaction of a person who feels extremely well-off. The first episode of 
the dream may also be included among the boastings by anyone who will 
bear in mind the great Rabelais’ incomparable account of the life and 
deeds of Gargantua and his son Pantagruel. 

Here is the material relating to the two childhood scenes which I have 
promised my readers. I had bought a new trunk for the journey, of a 
brownish violet colour. This colour appears more than once in the dream: 


1 [The well-known Austrian dramatist (1791-1872).] 

2 [Footnote added 1911:] In an interesting paper, Silberer (1910) has tried to show 
from this part of my dream that the dream-work can succeed in reproducing not 
only the latent dream-thoughts but also the psychical processes that take place 
during the formation of dreams. (This is what he terms ‘the functional phenom- 
enon.’) [See below, pp. 507 ff . — Added 1914:] But he is, I think, overlooking the 
fact that ‘the psychical processes that take place during the formation of dreams’ 
were, like the rest, part of the material of my thoughts. In this boastful dream I 
was evidently proud of having discovered those processes. 

3 [The first of these is in fact further analysed on pp. 440 ff.] 




B. Infantile Material 


237 


the violet-brown violets made of a stiff material and beside them a thing 
known as a ‘ Madchenfanger [‘girl-catcher’] 1 — and the furniture in the 
ministerial apartments. It is commonly believed by children that people are 
struck by anything neiv. The following scene from my childhood has been 
described to me, and my memory of the description has taken the place of 
my memory of the scene itself. It appears that when I was two years old I 
still occasionally ivetted the bed , and when I was reproached for this I con- 
soled my father by promising to buy him a nice new red bed in N., the near- 
est town of any size. This was the origin of the parenthetical phrase in the 
dream to the effect that we had bought or had to buy the urinal in town: one 
must keep one’s promises. (Notice, too, the juxtaposition in symbolism of 
the male urinal and the female trunk or box. [Cf. pp. 177 £]) This promise 
of mine exhibited all the megalomania of childhood. We have already 
come across the significant part played in dreams by children’s difficulties 
in connection with micturition (cf. the dream reported on p. 222). We 
have also learned from the psychoanalysis of neurotic subjects the intimate 
connection between bed-wetting and the character trait of ambition. 2 

When I was seven or eight years old there was another domestic scene, 
which I can remember very clearly. One evening before going to sleep I dis- 
regarded the rules which modesty lays down and obeyed the calls of nature 
in my parents’ bedroom while they were present. In the course of his repri- 
mand, my father let fall the words: ‘The boy will come to nothing.’ This 
must have been a frightful blow to my ambition, for references to this scene 
are still constantly recurring in my dreams and are always linked with an 
enumeration of my achievements and successes, as though I wanted to say: 
‘You see, I have come to something.’ This scene, then, provided the material 
for the final episode of the dream, in which — in revenge, of course — the 
roles were interchanged. The older man (clearly my father, since his blind- 
ness in one eye referred to his unilateral glaucoma) 3 was now micturating in 


1 [This word, ordinarily used in the sense of ‘rake’ (see footnote 3 on p. 238), seems 
here to be the slang name of some sort of buttonhole. Cf. corresponding terms 
such as ‘fascinator’ and ‘beaucatcher’ used in America for women’s head-dresses.] 

2 [This sentence was added in 1914. The first mention of the connection seems 
to have been made in the last paragraph of Freud’s paper on ‘Character and Anal 
Erotism’ (1908^).] 

3 There is another interpretation. He was one-eyed like Odin, the father-god. — 
Odhins Trost \ Odin’s Consolation , a mythological novel by Felix Dahn (1880)] — 
The consolation I offered him in the first childhood scene of buying him a new bed. 




238 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


front of me, just as I had in front of him in my childhood. In the reference 
to his glaucoma I was reminding him of the cocaine, which had helped him 
in the operation [cf. pp. 194 £], as though I had in that way kept my prom- 
ise. Moreover, 1 was making fun of him; I had to hand him the urinal be- 
cause he was blind, and I revelled in allusions to my discoveries in 
connection with the theory of hysteria, of which I felt so proud. 1 

The two scenes of micturition from my childhood were in any case 
closely linked to the topic of megalomania; but their emergence while I 
was travelling to Aussee was further assisted by the chance circumstance 
that there was no lavatory attached to my compartment and that I had 
reason to anticipate the predicament which in fact arose in the morning. 
I awoke with the sensations of a physical need. One might, I think, be in- 
clined to suppose that these sensations were the actual provoking agent of 
the dream; but I would prefer to take another view, namely that the desire 
to micturate was only called up by the dream-thoughts. It is quite un- 
usual for me to be disturbed in my sleep by physical needs of any kind, 
especially at the hour at which 1 awoke on this occasion — a quarter to 
three in the morning. And I may meet a further objection by remarking 
that upon other journeys under more comfortable conditions I have 


1 Here is some further interpretative material. Handing him the glass [urinal] re- 
minded me of the story of the peasant at the optician’s, trying glass after glass 
and still not being able to read. — (Peasant-career [ Bauernfdnger ; ‘sharper’] : girl- 
catcher [ Madchenfanger ] in the preceding episode of the dream.) — The way in 
which the father in Zola’s La terre was treated among the peasants after he had 
grown feeble-minded. — The tragic requital that lay in my father’s soiling his bed 
like a child during the last days of his life [cf. p. 437] , hence my appearance in 
the dream as a sick-nurse. — ‘ Here it was as though thinking and experiencing were 
one and the same thing. ’ This recalled a strongly revolutionary literary play by 
Oskar Panizza [‘ Das LiebeskonziV (1895)], in which God the Father is ignomin- 
iously treated as a paralytic old man. In his case will and deed were represented 
as one and the same thing, and he had to be restrained from cursing and swear- 
ing by one of his archangels, a kind of Ganymede, because his imprecations 
would be promptly fulfilled. — My making plans was a reproach against my fa- 
ther dating from a later period. And indeed the whole rebellious content of the 
dream, with its lese majeste and its derision of the higher authorities, went back 
to rebellion against my father. A Prince is known as the father of his country; the 
father is the oldest, first, and for children the only authority, and from his auto- 
cratic power the other social authorities have developed in the course of the his- 
tory of human civilization — except in so far as the ‘matriarchy’ calls for a 




B. Infantile Material 


239 


scarcely ever felt a need to micturate when I have woken up early. But in 
any case it will do no harm to leave the point unresolved. 1 

My experiences in analysing dreams have drawn my attention to the 
fact that trains of thought reaching back to earliest childhood lead off 
even from dreams which seem at first sight to have been completely in- 
terpreted, since their sources and instigating wish have been discovered 
without difficulty. I have therefore been compelled to ask myself whether 
this characteristic may not be a further essential precondition of dream- 
ing. Stated in general terms, this would imply that every dream was 
linked in its manifest content with recent experiences and in its latent 
content with the most ancient experiences. And I have in fact been able 
to show in my analysis of hysteria that these ancient experiences have re- 
mained recent in the proper sense of the word up to the immediate pres- 
ent. It is still extremely hard to demonstrate the truth of this suspicion; 
and I shall have to return in another connection (Chapter VII, [pp. 553 
ff.]) to a consideration of the probable part played by the earliest experi- 
ences of childhood in the formation of dreams. 

Of the three characteristics of memory in dreams enumerated at the 
beginning of this chapter, one — the preference for non-essential materials 


qualification of this assertion. — The phrase ‘thinking and experiencing were one 
and the same thing had a reference to the explanation of hysterical symptoms, 
and the ‘male urinal’ belonged in the same connection. I need not explain to a 
Viennese the principle of the ‘ Gschnas. ’ It consists in constructing what appear 
to be rare and precious objects out of trivial and preferably comic and worthless 
materials (for instance, in making armour out of saucepans, wisps of straw and 
dinner rolls) — a favourite pastime at bohemian parties here in Vienna. I had ob- 
served that this is precisely what hysterical subjects do: alongside what has really 
happened to them, they unconsciously build up frightful or perverse imaginary 
events which they construct out of the most innocent and everyday material of 
their experience. It is to these phantasies that their symptoms are in the first in- 
stance attached and not to their recollections of real events, whether serious or 
equally innocent. This revelation had helped me over a number of difficulties 
and had given me particular pleasure. What made it possible for me to refer to 
this by means of the dream-element of the ‘male urinal’ was as follows. I had 
been told that at the latest ‘Gschnas’- night a poisoned chalice belonging to Lu- 
crezia Borgia had been exhibited; its central and principal constituent had been 
a male urinal of the type used in hospitals. 

1 [This dream is further discussed on pp. 440 ff.] 




240 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


in the content of dreams — has been satisfactorily cleared up by being 
traced back to dream-distortion. We have been able to confirm the exis- 
tence of the other two — the emphasis upon recent and upon infantile 
material — but we have not been able to account for them on the basis of 
the motives that lead to dreaming. These two characteristics, whose ex- 
planation and appreciation remain to be discovered, must be kept in 
mind. Their proper place must be looked for elsewhere — either in the 
psychology of the state of sleep or in the discussion of the structure of the 
mental apparatus upon which we shall later embark, after we have learnt 
that the interpretation of dreams is like a window through which we can 
get a glimpse of the interior of that apparatus. [See Chapter VII.] 

There is, however, another inference following from these last dream- 
analyses to which I will draw attention at once. Dreams frequently seem 
to have more than one meaning. Not only, as our examples have shown, 
may they include several wish-fulfilments one alongside the other; but a 
succession of meanings or wish-fulfilments may be superimposed on one 
another, the bottom one being the fulfilment of a wish dating from earliest 
childhood. And here again the question arises whether it might not be 
more correct to assert that this occurs ‘invariably’ rather than ‘frequently .’ 1 


(C) 

THE SOMATIC SOURCES OF DREAMS 

If one tries to interest an educated layman in the problems of dreams 
and, with that end in view, asks him what in his opinion are the sources 
from which they arise, one finds as a rule that he feels confident of pos- 
sessing the answer to this part of the question. He thinks at once of the 


1 [Footnote added 1914:] The fact that the meanings of dreams are arranged in su- 
perimposed layers is one of the most delicate, though also one of the most inter- 
esting, problems of dream-interpretation. Anyone who forgets this possibility 
will easily go astray and be led into making untenable assertions upon the nature 
of dreams. Yet it is still a fact that far too few investigations have been made into 
this matter. Hitherto the only thorough piece of research has been Otto Rank’s 
[1912a] into the fairly regular stratification of symbols in dreams provoked by 
pressure of the bladder. [See below, pp. 4 1 2 ffi] 




C. Somatic Sources 


241 


effects produced on the construction of dreams by digestive disturbances 
or difficulties — ‘dreams come from indigestion’ [cf. p. 54] — by postures 
accidentally assumed by the body and by other small incidents during 
sleep. It never seems to occur to him that when all these factors have been 
taken into account anything is left over that needs explaining. 

I have already discussed at length in the opening chapter (Section C) 
the part assigned by scientific writers to somatic sources of stimulation in 
the formation of dreams; so that here I need only recall the results of that 
enquiry. We found that three different kinds of somatic sources of stimu- 
lation were distinguished: objective sensory stimuli arising from external 
objects, internal states of excitation of the sense organs having only a sub- 
jective basis, and somatic stimuli derived from the interior of the body. 
We noticed moreover that the authorities were inclined to push into the 
background, or to exclude entirely, any possible psychical sources of 
dreams, as compared with these somatic stimuli (cf. p. 71). In our exam- 
ination of the claims made on behalf of somatic sources of stimulation we 
arrived at the following conclusions. The significance of objective excita- 
tions of the sense organs (consisting partly of chance stimuli during sleep 
and partly of excitations such as cannot fail to impinge even upon a sleep- 
ing mind) is established from numerous observations and has been exper- 
imentally confirmed (cf. pp. 55 f). The part played by subjective sensory 
excitations seems to be demonstrated by the recurrence in dreams of hyp- 
nagogic sensory images (cf. pp. 62 fi). And lastly it appears that, though 
it is impossible to prove that the images and ideas occurring in our 
dreams can be traced back to internal somatic stimuli to the extent to 
which this has been asserted to be the case, nevertheless this origin finds 
support in the universally recognized influence exercised upon our 
dreams by states of excitation in our digestive, urinary and sexual organs 
[cf. pp. 68 fi] . 

It would appear, then, that ‘nervous stimulation’ and ‘somatic stimu- 
lation’ are the somatic sources of dreams — that is to say, according to 
many writers, their sole source. 

On the other hand, we have already found a number of doubts ex- 
pressed, which seemed to imply a criticism, not indeed of the correctness, 
but of the adequacy of the theory of somatic stimulation. 

However secure the supporters of this theory might feel in its factual 
basis — especially as far as accidental and external nervous stimuli are con- 
cerned, since these can be traced in the content of dreams without any 
trouble at all — not one of them could fail to perceive that it is impossible 



242 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


to attribute the wealth of ideational material in dreams to external nervous 
stimuli alone. Miss Mary Whiton Calkins (1893, 312) examined her own 
and another person’s dreams for six weeks with this question in mind. She 
found that in only 13.2 per cent and 6.7 per cent of them respectively was 
it possible to trace the element of external sense-perception; while only 
two cases in the collection were derivable from organic sensations. Here 
we have statistical confirmation of what I had been led to suspect from a 
hasty survey of my own experiences. 

It has often been proposed to separate off ‘dreams due to nervous stim- 
ulation’ from other forms of dreams as a subspecies that has been thor- 
oughly investigated. Thus Spitta [1882, 233] divides dreams into ‘dreams 
due to nervous stimulation’ and ‘dreams due to association.’ This solution 
was, however, bound to remain unsatisfactory so long as it was impossible 
to demonstrate the link between the somatic sources of a dream and its 
ideational content. Thus, in addition to the first objection — the insuffi- 
cient frequency of external sources of stimulation — there was a second 
one — the insufficient explanation of dreams afforded by such sources. We 
have a right to expect the supporters of this theory to give us explanations 
of two points: first, why it is that the external stimulus of a dream is not 
perceived in its true character but is invariably misunderstood (cf. the 
alarm-clock dreams on pp. 59 fi); and secondly, why it is that the reaction 
of the perceiving mind to these misunderstood stimuli should lead to re- 
sults of such unpredictable variety. 

By way of answer to these questions, Striimpell (1877, 108 f.) tells us 
that, because the mind is withdrawn from the external world during sleep, 
it is unable to give a correct interpretation of objective sensory stimuli and 
is obliged to construct illusions on the basis of what is in many respects an 
indeterminate impression. To quote his own words: ‘As soon as a sensation 
or complex of sensations or a feeling or a psychical process of any kind 
arises in the mind during sleep as a result of an external or internal nervous 
stimulus and is perceived by the mind, that process calls up sensory images 
from the circle of experiences left over in the mind from the waking 
state — that is to say, earlier perceptions — which are either bare or accom- 
panied by their appropriate psychical values. The process surrounds itself, 
as it were, with a larger or smaller number of images of this kind and 
through them the impression derived from the nervous stimulus acquires 
its psychical value. We speak here (just as we usually do in the case of wak- 
ing behaviour) of the sleeping mind “interpreting” the impressions made 



C. Somatic Sources 


243 


by the nervous stimulus. The outcome of this interpretation is what we 
describe as a “dream due to nervous stimulation,” that is, a dream whose 
components are determined by a nervous stimulus producing its psychical 
effects in the mind according to the laws of reproduction.’ [Cf. pp. 60 £, 
83 f. and 87.] 

Wundt [1874, 656 £] is saying something essentially identical with 
this theory when he asserts that the ideas occurring in dreams are derived, 
for the most part at least, from sensory stimuli, including especially co- 
enaesthetic sensations, and are for that reason mainly imaginative illu- 
sions and probably only to a small extent pure mnemic ideas intensified 
into hallucinations. [Cf. pp. 71 £] Strtimpell (1877, 84) has hit upon an 
apt simile for the relation which subsists on this theory between the con- 
tents of a dream and its stimuli, when he writes that ‘it is as though the 
ten fingers of a man who knows nothing of music were wandering over 
the keys of a piano.’ [Cf. pp. 104 f. and 147.] Thus a dream is not, on 
this view, a mental phenomenon based on psychical motives, but the out- 
come of a physiological stimulus which is expressed in psychical symp- 
toms because the apparatus upon which the stimulus impinges is capable 
of no other form of expression. A similar presupposition also underlies, 
for instance, the famous analogy by means of which Meynert attempted 
to explain obsessive ideas: the analogy of a clock-face on which certain 
figures stand out by being more prominently embossed than the rest. 1 

However popular the theory of the somatic stimulation of dreams may 
have become and however attractive it may seem, its weak point is easily 
displayed. Every somatic dream-stimulus which requires the sleeping men- 
tal apparatus to interpret it by the construction of an illusion may give rise 
to an unlimited number of such attempts at interpretation — that is to say, 
it may be represented in the content of the dream by an immense variety 
of ideas. 2 But the theory put forward by Strtimpell and Wundt is incapable 


1 [This has not been traced in Meynert’s published writings.] 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] Mourly Void [1910-12] has produced a two-volume 
work containing detailed and precise reports of a series of experimentally pro- 
duced dreams. [Cf. pp. 70.] I should recommend a study of this work to anyone 
who wishes to convince himself of how little light is thrown on the content of 
individual dreams by the conditions of the experiments described in it and of 
how little help in general is afforded by such experiments towards an under- 
standing of the problems of dreams. [See, however, p. 204 n.\ 



244 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


of producing any motive governing the relation between an external stim- 
ulus and the dream-idea chosen for its interpretation — is incapable, that is, 
of explaining what Lipps (1883, 170) describes as the ‘remarkable choice 
often made’ by these stimuli ‘in the course of their productive activity.’ Ob- 
jections have further been raised against the presupposition upon which the 
whole theory of illusion is based — the presupposition that the sleeping 
mind is incapable of recognizing the true nature of objective sensory stim- 
uli. Burdach, the physiologist, showed us long ago that even in sleep the 
mind is very well able to interpret correctly the sense impressions that reach 
it and to react in accordance with that correct interpretation; for he recalled 
the fact that particular sense impressions which seem important to the 
sleeper can be excepted from the general neglect to which such impressions 
are subjected during sleep (as in the case of a nursing mother or wet-nurse 
and her charge), and that a sleeper is much more certain to be woken by 
the sound of his own name than by any indifferent auditory impression — 
all of which implies that the mind distinguishes between sensations during 
sleep (cf. pp. 82). Burdach went on to infer from these observations that 
what we must presume during the state of sleep is not an incapacity to in- 
terpret sensory stimuli but a lack of interest in them. The same arguments 
which were used by Burdach in 1 830 were brought forward once more 
without any modifications by Lipps in 1883 in his criticism of the theory 
of somatic stimulation. Thus the mind seems to behave like the sleeper in 
the anecdote. When someone asked him if he was asleep, he replied ‘No.’ 
But when his questioner went on to say: ‘Then lend me ten florins,’ he took 
refuge in a subterfuge and replied: ‘I’m asleep.’ 

The inadequacy of the theory of the somatic stimulation of dreams 
can be demonstrated in other ways. Observation shows that external 
stimuli do not necessarily compel me to dream, even though such stimuli 
appear in the content of my dream when and if I do dream. Supposing, 
let us say, that I am subjected to a tactile stimulus while I am asleep. A va- 
riety of different reactions are then open to me. I may disregard it, and 
when I wake up I may find, for instance, that my leg is uncovered or that 
there is some pressure on my arm; pathology provides very numerous in- 
stances in which various powerfully exciting sensory and motor stimuli 
can remain without effect during sleep. Or again, I may be aware of the 
sensation in my sleep — I may be aware of it, as one might say, ‘through’ 
my sleep — (which is what happens as a rule in the case of painful stimuli) 
but without my weaving the pain into a dream. And thirdly, I may react 



C. Somatic Sources 


245 


to the stimulus by waking up so as to get rid of it. 1 It is only as a fourth 
possibility that the nervous stimulus may cause me to dream. Yet the 
other possibilities are realized at least as frequently as this last one of con- 
structing a dream. And this could not happen unless the motive for 
dreaming lay elsewhere than in somatic sources of stimulation. 

Certain other writers — Schemer [1861] and Volkelt [1875], the phi- 
losopher, who adopted Schemer’s views — formed a just estimate of the 
gaps which 1 have here indicated in the explanation of dreams as being 
due to somatic stimulation. These writers attempted to define more pre- 
cisely the mental activities which lead to the production of such varie- 
gated dream-images from the somatic stimuli; in other words, they 
sought to regard dreaming once again as something essentially mental — 
as a psychical activity. [Cf. pp. 109 ffi] Schemer did not merely depict the 
psychical characteristics unfolded in the production of dreams in terms 
charged with poetic feeling and glowing with life; he believed, too, that 
he had discovered the principle according to which the mind deals with 
the stimuli presented to it. On his view, the dream-work, when the imag- 
ination is set free from the shackles of daytime, seeks to give a symbolic 
representation of the nature of the organ from which the stimulus arises 
and of the nature of the stimulus itself. Thus he provides a kind of 
‘dream-book’ to serve as a guide to the interpretation of dreams, which 
makes it possible to deduce from the dream-images inferences as to the 
somatic feelings, the state of the organs and the character of the stimuli 
concerned. ‘Thus the image of a cat expresses a state of angry ill-temper, 
and the image of a smooth and lightly-coloured loaf of bread stands for 
physical nudity.’ [Volkelt, 1875, 32.] The human body as a whole is pic- 
tured by the dream-imagination as a house and the separate organs of the 
body by portions of a house. In ‘dreams with a dental stimulus,’ an en- 
trance-hall with a high, vaulted roof corresponds to the oral cavity and a 
staircase to the descent from the throat to the oesophagus. ‘In dreams due 
to headaches, the top of the head is represented by the ceiling of a room 
covered with disgusting, toad-like spiders.’ [Ibid., 33 fi] A variety of such 
symbols are employed by dreams to represent the same organ. ‘Thus the 


1 [ Footnote added 1919:] Cf. Landauer (1918) on behaviour during sleep. Anyone 
can observe persons asleep carrying out actions which obviously have a meaning. 
A man asleep is not reduced to complete idiocy; on the contrary, he is capable 
of logical and deliberate acts. 




246 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


breathing lung will be symbolically represented by a blazing furnace, with 
flames roaring with a sound like the passage of air; the heart will be rep- 
resented by hollow boxes, or baskets, the bladder by round, bag-shaped 
objects or, more generally, by hollow ones.’ [Ibid., 34.] ‘It is of special im- 
portance that at the end of a dream the organ concerned or its function 
is often openly revealed, and as a rule in relation to the dreamer’s own 
body. Thus a dream with a dental stimulus usually ends by the dreamer 
picturing himself pulling a tooth out of his mouth.’ [Ibid., 35.] 

This theory of dream-interpretation cannot be said to have been very 
favourably received by other writers on the subject. Its main feature seems 
to be its extravagance; and there has even been hesitation in recognizing 
such justification as, in my opinion, it can lay claim to. As will have been 
seen, it involves a revival of dream-interpretation by means of symbolism — 
the same method that was employed in antiquity, except that the field from 
which interpretations are collected is restricted within the limits of the hu- 
man body. Its lack of any technique of interpreting that can be grasped sci- 
entifically must greatly narrow the application of Schemer’s theory. It 
seems to leave the door open to arbitrary interpretations, especially as in its 
case, too, the same stimulus can be represented in the dream-content in a 
variety of different ways. Thus even Schemer’s disciple, Volkelt, found 
himself unable to confirm the view that the body was represented by a 
house. Objections are also bound to arise from the fact that once again the 
mind is saddled with the dream-work as a useless and aimless function; for, 
according to the theory we are discussing, the mind is content with making 
phantasies about the stimulus with which it is occupied, without the re- 
motest hint at anything in the nature of disposing of the stimulus. 

There is one particular criticism, however, which is gravely damaging 
to Schemer’s theory of the symbolization of somatic stimuli. These stimuli 
are present at all times and it is generally held that the mind is more acces- 
sible to them during sleep than when it is awake. It is difficult to under- 
stand, then, why the mind does not dream continuously all through the 
night, and, indeed, dream every night of all the organs. An attempt may 
be made to avoid this criticism by adding the further condition that in or- 
der to arouse dream-activity it is necessary for special excitations to proceed 
from the eyes, ears, teeth, intestines, etc. But the difficulty then arises of 
proving the objective nature of such increases of stimulus — which is only 
possible in a small number of cases. If dreams of flying are a symbolization 
of the rising and sinking of the lobes of the lungs [cf. p. 69], then, as 
Striimpell [1877, 119] has already pointed out, either such dreams would 



C. Somatic Sources 


247 


have to be much more frequent than they are or it would be necessary to 
prove an increase in the activity of breathing in the course of them. There 
is a third possibility, which is the most probable of all, namely that special 
motives may be temporarily operative which direct the attention to visceral 
sensations that are uniformly present at all times. This possibility, however, 
carries us beyond the scope of Schemer’s theory. 

The value of the views put forward by Schemer and Volkelt lies in the 
fact that they draw attention to a number of characteristics of the content 
of dreams which call for explanation and seem to promise fresh discoveries. 
It is perfectly true that dreams contain symbolizations of bodily organs 
and functions, that water in a dream often points to a urinary stimulus, and 
that the male genitals can be represented by an upright stick or a pillar, and 
so on. In the case of dreams in which the field of vision is full of movement 
and bright colours, in contrast to the drabness of other dreams, it is 
scarcely possible not to interpret them as ‘dreams with a visual stimulus’; 
nor can one dispute the part played by illusions in the case of dreams char- 
acterized by noise and a confusion of voices. Schemer [1861, 167] reports 
a dream of two rows of pretty, fair-haired boys standing opposite each 
other on a bridge, and of their attacking each other and then going back 
to their original position, till at last the dreamer saw himself sitting down 
on a bridge and pulling a long tooth out of his jaw. Similarly Volkelt 
[1875, 52] reports a dream in which two rows of drawers in a cupboard 
played a part and which once more ended with the dreamer pulling out a 
tooth. Dream-formations such as these, which are recorded in great num- 
bers by the two authors, forbid our dismissing Schemer’s theory as an idle 
invention without looking for its kernel of truth. [See p. 360.] The task, 
then, that faces us is to find an explanation of another kind for the sup- 
posed symbolization of what is alleged to be a dental stimulus. 1 

Throughout the whole of this discussion of the theory of the somatic 
sources of dreams I have refrained from making use of the argument based 
upon my dream-analyses. If it can be proved, by a procedure which other 
writers have not employed upon their dream-material, that dreams possess 
a value of their own as psychical acts, that wishes are the motive for their 
construction and that experiences of the preceding day provide the imme- 
diate material for their content, then any other theory of dreams, which 


1 [These dreams are further considered on pp. 395 fE] 



248 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


neglects so important a procedure of research and accordingly represents 
dreams as a useless and puzzling psychical reaction to somatic stimuli, 
stands condemned without there being any necessity for specific criticisms. 
Otherwise — and this seems highly improbable — there would have to be 
two quite different kinds of dreaming, one of which has come only under 
my observation and the other only under that of the earlier authorities. All 
that remains, therefore, is to find a place in my theory of dreams for the 
facts upon which the current theory of the somatic stimulation of dreams 
is based. 

We have already taken the first step in this direction by advancing the 
thesis (see pp. 20 1 f.) that the dream-work is under the necessity of combin- 
ing into a unity all instigations to dreaming which are active simultaneously. 
We found that, when two or more experiences capable of creating an im- 
pression are left over from the previous day, the wishes derived from them 
are combined in a single dream, and similarly that the psychically significant 
impression and the indifferent experiences from the previous day are 
brought together in the dream-material, provided always that it is possible 
to set up communicating ideas between them. Thus a dream appears to be 
a reaction to everything that is simultaneously present in the sleeping mind 
as currently active material. So far as we have hitherto analysed the material 
of dreams, we have seen it as a collection of psychical residues and memory- 
traces, to which (on account of the preference shown for recent and infantile 
material) we have been led to attribute a hitherto indefinable quality of being 
‘currently active.’ We can foresee, then, without any great difficulty, what 
will happen if fresh material in the form of sensations is added during sleep 
to these currendy active memories. It is once again owing to the fact of their 
being currently active that these sensory excitations are of importance for the 
dream; they are united with the other currendy active psychical material to 
furnish what is used for the construction of the dream. To put it another 
way, stimuli arising during sleep are worked up into a wish-fulfilment the 
other constituents of which are the familiar psychical ‘day’s residues.’ This 
combination need not occur; as I have already pointed out, there is more 
than one way of reacting to a somatic stimulus during sleep. When it does 
occur, it means that it has been possible to find ideational material to serve 
as the content of the dream of such a sort as to be able to represent both 
kinds of source of the dream — the somatic and the psychical. 

The essential nature of the dream is not altered by the fact of somatic 
material being added to its psychical sources: a dream remains the fulfilment 



C. Somatic Sources 


249 


of a wish, no matter in what way the expression of that wish-fulfilment is 
determined by the currently active material. 

I am prepared to leave room at this point for the operation of a num- 
ber of special factors which can lend a varying importance to external 
stimuli in relation to dreams. As I picture it, a combination of individual 
factors, physiological and accidental, produced by the circumstances of 
the moment, is what determines how a person shall behave in particular 
cases of comparatively intense objective stimulation during sleep. The 
habitual or accidental depth of his sleep, taken in conjunction with the 
intensity of the stimulus, will make it possible in one case for him to sup- 
press the stimulus so that his sleep is not interrupted and in another case 
will compel him to wake up or will encourage an attempt to overcome 
the stimulus by weaving it into a dream. In accordance with these various 
possible combinations, external objective stimuli will find expression in 
dreams with greater or less frequency in one person than in another. In 
my own case, since I am an excellent sleeper and obstinately refuse to al- 
low anything to disturb my sleep, it very rarely happens that external 
causes of excitation find their way into my dreams; whereas psychical mo- 
tives obviously cause me to dream very easily. In fact I have only noted a 
single dream in which an objective and painful source of stimulus is rec- 
ognizable; and it will be most instructive to examine the effect which the 
external stimulus produced in this particular dream. 

I was riding on a grey horse, timidly and aivkwardly to begin with, as 
though I were only reclining upon it. I met one of my colleagues, P., ivho was 
sitting high on a horse, dressed in a tweed suit, and who drew my attention 
to something (probably to my bad seat). I noiv began to find myself sitting 
more and more firmly and comfortably on my highly intelligent horse, and 
noticed that I was feeling quite at home up there. My saddle was a kind of 
bolster, which completely filled the space between its neck and crupper. In this 
way I rode straight in between two vans. After riding some distance up the 
street, I turned round and tried to dismount, first in front of a small open 
chapel that stood in the street frontage. Then I actually did dismount in front 
of another chapel that stood near it. My hotel was in the same street; I might 
have let the horse go to it on its oivn, but I preferred to lead it there. It was 
as thotigh I shotdd have felt ashamed to arrive at it on horseback. A hotel 
‘boots’ was standing in front of the hotel; he showed me a note of mine that 
had been found, and laughed at me over it. In the note was written, doubly 



250 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


underlined: ‘No food’ and theti another remark (indistinct) such as No 
work, ’ together with a vague idea that I was in a strange town in which I 
was doing no work. 

It would not be supposed at first sight that this dream originated un- 
der the influence, or rather under the compulsion, of a painful stimulus. 
But for some days before I had been suffering from boils which made 
every movement a torture; and finally a boil the size of an apple had risen 
at the base of my scrotum, which caused me the most unbearable pain 
with every step I took. Feverish lassitude, loss of appetite and the hard 
work with which I nevertheless carried on — all these had combined with 
the pain to depress me. I was not properly capable of discharging my 
medical duties. There was, however, one activity for which, in view of the 
nature and situation of my complaint, I should certainly have been less 
fitted than for any other, and that was — riding. And this was precisely the 
activity in which the dream landed me; it was the most energetic denial 
of my illness that could possibly be imagined. I cannot in fact ride, nor 
have I, apart from this, had dreams of riding. I have only sat on a horse 
once in my life and that was without a saddle, and I did not enjoy it. But 
in this dream I was riding as though 1 had no boil on my perineum — or 
rather because I wanted not to have one. My saddle, to judge from its de- 
scription, was the poultice which had made it possible for me to fall 
asleep. Under its assuaging influence I had probably been unaware of my 
pain during the first hours of sleep. The painful feelings had then an- 
nounced themselves and sought to wake me; whereupon the dream came 
and said soothingly: ‘No! Go on sleeping! There’s no need to wake up. 
You haven’t got a boil; for you’re riding on a horse, and it’s quite certain 
that you couldn’t ride if you had a boil in that particular place.’ And the 
dream was successful. The pain was silenced, and I went on sleeping. 

But the dream was not content with ‘suggesting away’ my boil by ob- 
stinately insisting upon an idea that was inconsistent with it and so be- 
having like the hallucinatory delusion of the mother who had lost her 
child or the merchant whose losses had robbed him of his fortune. 1 The 
details of the sensation which was being repudiated and of the picture 
which was employed in order to repress that sensation also served the 


1 Cf. the passage in Griesinger [1861, 106, referred to on pp. 116] and my re- 
marks in my second paper on the neuro-psychoses of defence (Freud, 189 6b). 
[Actually the reference seems to be to a paragraph near the end of Freud’s first 
paper on that subject (Freud, 1894<t).] 




C. Somatic Sources 


251 


dream as a means of connecting other material that was currently active 
in my mind with the situation in the dream and of giving that material 
representation. 1 was riding on a grey horse, whose colour corresponded 
precisely to the pepper-and-salt colour of the suit my colleague P. was 
wearing when I had last met him in the country. The cause of my boils 
had been ascribed to my eating highly-spiced food — an aetiology that was 
at least preferable to the sugar [diabetes] which might also occur to one 
in connection with boils. My friend P. liked to ride the high horse over 
me ever since he had taken over one of my women patients on whom 1 
had pulled off some remarkable feats. (In the dream I began by riding 
tangentially — like the feat of a trick-rider.) But in fact, like the horse in 
the anecdote of the Sunday horseman, 1 this patient had taken me wher- 
ever she felt inclined. Thus the horse acquired the symbolic meaning of a 
woman patient. (It was highly intelligent in the dream.) ‘I felt quite at home 
up there’ referred to the position I had occupied in this patient’s house be- 
fore I was replaced by P. Not long before, one of my few patrons among 
the leading physicians in this city had remarked to me in connection with 
this same house: ‘You struck me as being hrmly in the saddle there.’ It was 
a remarkable feat, too, to be able to carry on my psychotherapeutic work 
for eight or ten hours a day while I was having so much pain. But I knew 
that I could not go on long with my peculiarly difficult work unless I was 
in completely sound physical health; and my dream was full of gloomy 
allusions to the situation in which I should then find myself. (The note 
which neurasthenics bring with them to show the doctor; no ivork, no 
food!) In the course of further interpretation I saw that the dream-work 
had succeeded in finding a path from the wishful situation of riding to 
some scenes of quarrelling from my very early childhood which must 
have occurred between me and a nephew of mine, a year my senior, who 
was at present living in England. [Cf. pp. 433 £] Furthermore, the dream 
had derived some of its elements from my travels in Italy: the street in the 
dream was composed of impressions of Verona and Siena. A still deeper 
interpretation led to sexual dream-thoughts, and I recalled the meaning 
which references to Italy seem to have had in the dreams of a woman pa- 
tient who had never visited that lovely country: ‘gen Italien [to Italy] ’ — 
‘ Genitalien [genitals]’; and this was connected, too, with the house in 


1 [In a letter to Fliess of July 7, 1898 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 92), Freud describes 
‘the famous principle of Itzig, the Sunday horseman: “Itzig, where are you riding 
to?” — “Don’t ask me! Ask the horse!”’] 




252 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


which I had preceded my friend P. as physician, as well as with the situa- 
tion of my boil. 

In another dream 1 I similarly succeeded in warding off a threatened 
interruption of my sleep which came this time from a sensory stimulus. 
In this case it was only by chance, however, that I was able to discover the 
link between the dream and its accidental stimulus and thus to under- 
stand the dream. One morning at the height of summer, while I was stay- 
ing at a mountain resort in the Tyrol, I woke up knowing I had had a 
dream that the Pope was dead. I failed to interpret this dream — a non- 
visual one — and only remembered as part of its basis that I had read in a 
newspaper a short time before that his Holiness was suffering from a 
slight indisposition. In the course of the morning, however, my wife 
asked me if I had heard the frightful noise made by the pealing of bells 
that morning. I had been quite unaware of them, but I now understood 
my dream. It had been a reaction on the part of my need for sleep to the 
noise with which the pious Tyrolese had been trying to wake me. I had 
taken my revenge on them by drawing the inference which formed the 
content of the dream, and I had then continued my sleep without paying 
any more attention to the noise. 

The dreams quoted in earlier chapters included several which might 
serve as instances of the working-over of such so-called nervous stimuli. 
My dream of drinking water in great gulps [p. 148] is an example. The so- 
matic stimulus was apparently its only source, and the wish derived from 
the sensation (the thirst, that is) was apparently its only motive. The case 
is similar with other simple dreams in which a somatic stimulus seems able 
by itself to construct a wish. The dream of the woman patient who threw 
off the cooling apparatus from her cheek during the night [pp. 150 £] 
presents an unusual method of reacting to a painful stimulus with a wish- 
fulfilment: it appears as though the patient succeeded temporarily in mak- 
ing herself analgesic, while ascribing her pains to someone else. 

My dream of the three Fates [pp. 225 ffi] was clearly a hunger dream. 
But it succeeded in shifting the craving for nourishment back to a child’s 
longing for his mother’s breast, and it made use of an innocent desire as 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1914. The dream had already been very briefly 
recorded in Freud, 191 ?>h (No. 1); it will also be found in Lecture V of Freud, 
1916-17.] 




C. Somatic Sources 


253 


a screen for a more serious one which could not be so openly displayed. 
My dream about Count Thun [pp. 231 f£] showed how an accidental 
physical need can be linked up with the most intense (but at the same 
time the most intensely suppressed) mental impulses. And a case such as 
that related by Gamier (1872, 1, 476) of how the First Consul wove the 
noise of an exploding bomb into a battle dream before he woke up from 
it [p. 58 £] reveals with quite special clarity the nature of the sole motive 
that leads mental activity to concern itself with sensations during sleep. A 
young barrister, 1 fresh from his first important bankruptcy proceedings, 
who dropped asleep one afternoon, behaved in just the same way as the 
great Napoleon. He had a dream of a certain G. Reich of Husyatin [a 
town in Galicia] whom he had come across during a bankruptcy case; the 
name ‘Husyatin’ kept on forcing itself on his notice, till he woke up and 
found that his wife (who was suffering from a bronchial catarrh) was hav- 
ing a violent fit of coughing [in German ‘hasten] . 

Let us compare this dream of the first Napoleon (who, incidentally, 
was an extremely sound sleeper) with that of the sleepy student who was 
roused by his landlady and told that it was time to go to the hospital, and 
who proceeded to dream that he was in bed at the hospital and then slept 
on, under the pretext that as he was already in the hospital there was no 
need for him to get up and go there [p. 150]. This latter dream was 
clearly a dream of convenience. The dreamer admitted his motive for 
dreaming without any disguise; but at the same time he gave away one of 
the secrets of dreaming in general. All dreams are in a sense dreams of 
convenience: they serve the purpose of prolonging sleep instead of waking 
up. Dreams are the guardians of sleep and not its disturbers. We shall have 
occasion elsewhere to justify this view of them in relation to awakening 
factors of a psychical \dnd [see below pp. 577]; but we are already in a po- 
sition to show that it is applicable to the part played by objective external 
stimuli. Either the mind pays no attention at all to occasions for sensation 
during sleep — if it is able to do this despite the intensity of the stimuli 
and the significance which it knows attaches to them; or it makes use of 
a dream in order to deny the stimuli; or, thirdly, if it is obliged to recog- 
nize them, it seeks for an interpretation of them which will make the cur- 
rently active sensation into a component part of a situation which is 
wished for and which is consistent with sleeping. The currently active 


1 [This sentence and the next were added in 1909.] 




254 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


sensation is woven into a dream in order to rob it of reality. Napoleon 
could sleep on — with a conviction that what was trying to disturb him 
was only a dream-memory of the thunder of the guns at Arcole. 1 

Thus the wish to sleep (which the conscious ego is concentrated upon, and 
which, together with the dream-censorship and the ‘secondary revision ’ which 
I shall mention later [pp. 493 ff.], constitute the conscious ego’s share in 
dreaming) must in every case be reckoned as one of the motives for the forma- 
tion of dreams, and every successfid dream is a fidfilment of that wish. 1 We 
shall discuss elsewhere [pp. 570 ff.] the relations subsisting between this 
universal, invariably present and unchanging wish to sleep and the other 
wishes, of which now one and now another is fulfilled by the content of 
the dream. But we have found in the wish to sleep the factor that is able 
to fill the gap in the theory of Striimpell and Wundt [pp. 243 £] and to 
explain the perverse and capricious manner in which external stimuli are 
interpreted. The correct interpretation, which the sleeping mind is per- 
fectly capable of making, would involve an active interest and would re- 
quire that sleep should be brought to an end; for that reason, of all the 
possible interpretations, only those are admitted which are consistent with 
the absolute censorship exercised by the wish to sleep. ‘It is the nightingale 
and not the lark.’ For if it were the lark it would mean the end of the 
lovers’ night. Among the interpretations of the stimulus which are accord- 
ingly admissible, that one is then selected which can provide the best link 
with the wishful impulses lurking in the mind. Thus everything is unam- 
biguously determined and nothing is left to arbitrary decision. The misin- 
terpretation is not an illusion but, as one might say, an evasion. Here once 
again, however, just as when, in obedience to the dream-censorship, a sub- 
stitution is effected by displacement, we have to admit that we are faced 
by an act which deviates from normal psychical processes. 

When external nervous stimuli and internal somatic stimuli are in- 
tense enough to force psychical attention to themselves, then — provided 


1 The two sources from which I know this dream do not agree in their account of 
it. 

1 [The portion of this sentence in parentheses was not included in the first or sec- 
ond edition (1900 and 1909). The phrase ‘which the conscious ego is concen- 
trated upon, and which, together with the dream-censorship, constitute the 
conscious ego’s contribution to dreaming’ was added in 1911. The phrase ‘and 
the “secondary revision” which we shall mention later’ was added as a footnote 
in 1914 and incorporated in the text in 1930.] 




C. Somatic Sources 


255 


that their outcome is dreaming and not waking up — they serve as a fixed 
point for the formation of a dream, a nucleus in its material; a wish- 
fulfilment is then looked for that shall correspond to this nucleus, just as 
(see above, pp. 248) intermediate ideas are looked for between two psy- 
chical dream-stimuli. To that extent it is true that in a number of dreams 
the content of the dream is dictated by the somatic element. In this ex- 
treme instance it may even happen that a wish which is not actually a cur- 
rently active one is called up for the sake of constructing a dream. A 
dream, however, has no alternative but to represent a wish in the situation 
of having been fulfilled; it is, as it were, faced with the problem of looking 
for a wish which can be represented as fulfilled by the currently active sen- 
sation. If this immediate material is of a painful or distressing kind, that 
does not necessarily mean that it cannot be used for the construction of a 
dream. The mind has wishes at its disposal whose fulfilment produces un- 
pleasure. This seems self-contradictory; but it becomes intelligible when 
we take into account the presence of two psychical agencies and a censor- 
ship between them. 

As we have seen, there are ‘repressed’ wishes in the mind, which be- 
long to the first system and whose fulfilment is opposed by the second 
system. In saying that there are such wishes 1 am not making a historical 
statement to the effect that they once existed and were later abolished. 
The theory of repression, which is essential to the study of the psycho- 
neuroses, asserts that these repressed wishes still exist — though there is a 
simultaneous inhibition which holds them down. Linguistic usage hits 
the mark in speaking of the ‘suppression’ [i.e. the ‘pressing down’] of 
these impulses. The psychical arrangements that make it possible for such 
impulses to force their way to realization remain in being and in working 
order. Should it happen, however, that a suppressed wish of this kind is 
carried into effect, and that its inhibition by the second system (the sys- 
tem that is admissible to consciousness) is defeated, this defeat finds ex- 
pression as unpleasure. In conclusion: if sensations of an unpleasurable 
nature arising from somatic sources occur during sleep, the dream-work 
makes use of that event in order to represent — subject to the continuance 
of the censorship to a greater or less degree — the fulfilment of some wish 
which is normally suppressed. 1 


1 [This whole subject is further discussed in Section C of Chapter VII; see espe- 
cially pp. 557 ff. Cf. also pp. 284 and 492.] 




256 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


This state of affairs is what makes possible one group of anxiety- 
dreams — dream-structures unpropitious from the point of view of the 
wish-theory. A second group of them reveal a different mechanism; for 
anxiety in dreams may be psychoneurotic anxiety: it may originate from 
psychosexual excitations — in which case the anxiety corresponds to re- 
pressed libido. Where this is so, the anxiety, like the whole anxiety-dream, 
has the significance of a neurotic symptom, and we come near the limit at 
which the wish-fulfilling purpose of dreams breaks down. [See pp. 183 ff. 
and 579 ff.] But there are some anxiety-dreams [ — those of the first 
group — ] in which the feeling of anxiety is determined somatically — 
where, for instance, there happens to be difficulty in breathing owing to 
disease of the lungs or heart — and in such cases the anxiety is exploited in 
order to assist the fulfilment in the form of dreams of energetically sup- 
pressed wishes which, if they had been dreamt about for psychical reasons, 
would have led to a similar release of anxiety. But there is no difficulty in 
reconciling these two apparently different groups. In both groups of 
dreams two psychical factors are involved: an inclination towards an affect 
and an ideational content; and these are intimately related to each other. If 
one of them is currently active, it calls up the other even in a dream; in the 
one case the somatically determined anxiety calls up the suppressed idea- 
tional content, and in the other the ideational content with its accompa- 
nying sexual excitation, having been set free from repression, calls up a 
release of anxiety. We can put it that in the first case a somatically deter- 
mined affect is given a psychical interpretation; while in the other case, 
though the whole is psychically determined, the content which had been 
suppressed is easily replaced by a somatic interpretation appropriate to anx- 
iety. The difficulties which all this offers to our understanding have little 
to do with dreams: they arise from the fact that we are here touching on 
the problem of the generation of anxiety and on the problem of repression. 

There can be no doubt that physical coenaesthesia [or diffuse general 
sensibility, see p. 66 fi] is among the internal somatic stimuli which can 
dictate the content of dreams. It can do so, not in the sense that it can pro- 
vide the dream’s content, but in the sense that it can force upon the 
dream-thoughts a choice of the material to be represented in the content 
by putting forward one part of the material as being appropriate to its own 
character and by holding back another part. Apart from this, the coenaes- 
thetic feelings left over from the preceding day link themselves up, no 
doubt, with the psychical residues which have such an important influence 
on dreams. This general mood may persist unchanged in the dream or it 



C. Somatic Sources 


257 


may be mastered, and thus, if it is unpleasurable, may be changed into its 
opposite. 1 

Thus, in my opinion, somatic sources of stimulation during sleep (that 
is to say, sensations during sleep), unless they are of unusual intensity, play 
a similar part in the formation of dreams to that played by recent but in- 
different impressions left over from the previous day. I believe, that is, that 
they are brought in to help in the formation of a dream if they fit in ap- 
propriately with the ideational content derived from the dream’s psychical 
sources, but otherwise not. They are treated like some cheap material al- 
ways ready to hand, which is employed whenever it is needed, in contrast 
to a precious material which itself prescribes the way in which it shall be 
employed. If, to take a simile, a patron of the arts brings an artist some rare 
stone, such as a piece of onyx, and asks him to create a work of art from it, 
then the size of the stone, its colour and markings, help to decide what 
head or what scene shall be represented in it. Whereas in the case of a uni- 
form and plentiful material such as marble or sandstone, the artist merely 
follows some idea that is present in his own mind. It is only in this way, so 
it seems to me, that we can explain the fact that dream-content provided 
by somatic stimuli of no unusual intensity fails to appear in every dream 
or every night. [Cf. pp. 246.] 2 

I can perhaps best illustrate my meaning by an example, which, more- 
over, will bring us back to dream-interpretation. 

One day I had been trying to discover what might be the meaning of 
the feelings of being inhibited, of being glued to the spot, of not being 
able to get something done, and so on, which occur so often in dreams 
and are so closely akin to feelings of anxiety. That night I had the follow- 
ing dream: 

/ was very incompletely dressed and was going upstairs from a flat oti the 
ground floor to a higher storey. I was going up three steps at a time and was 
delighted at my agility. Suddenly I saw a maid-servant coming doivn the 
stairs — coming towards me, that is. I felt ashamed and tried to hurry, and at 


1 [Cf. pp. 492 ff. — This last sentence was added in 1914.] 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] Rank has shown in a number of papers [1910, 1912# and 
1912^] that certain arousal dreams produced by organic stimuli (dreams with a 
urinary stimulus and dreams of emission or orgasm) are especially suited to dem- 
onstrate the struggle between the need to sleep and the claims of organic needs, 
as well as the influence of the latter upon the content of dreams. [See pp. 412 ff.] 




258 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


this point the feeling of being inhibited set in: I was glued to the steps and un- 
able to budge from the spot. 

Analysis. — The situation in the dream is taken from everyday reality. 
I occupy two flats in a house in Vienna, which are connected only by the 
public staircase. My consulting-room and study are on the upper ground 
floor and my living rooms are one storey higher. When, late in the eve- 
ning, I have finished my work down below, I go up the stairs to my bed- 
room. On the evening before I had the dream, I had in fact made this 
short journey in rather disordered dress — that is to say, I had taken off my 
collar and tie and cuffs. In the dream this had been turned into a higher 
degree of undress, but, as usual, an indeterminate one. [Cf. p. 263.] I usu- 
ally go upstairs two or three steps at a time; and this was recognized in the 
dream itself as a wish-fulfilment: the ease with which I achieved it re- 
assured me as to the functioning of my heart. Further, this method of go- 
ing upstairs was an effective contrast to the inhibition in the second half 
of the dream. It showed me — what needed no proving — that dreams find 
no difficulty in representing motor acts carried out to perfection. (One 
need only recall dreams of flying.) 

The staircase up which I was going, however, was not the one in my 
house. At first I failed to recognize it and it was only the identity of the 
person who met me that made it clear to me what locality was intended. 
This person was the maid-servant of the old lady whom I was visiting 
twice a day in order to give her injections [cf. p. 142]; and the staircase, 
too, was just like the one in her house which I had to go up twice a day. 

Now how did this staircase and this female figure come to be in my 
dream? The feeling of shame at not being completely dressed is no doubt 
of a sexual nature; but the maid-servant whom I dreamt about was older 
than I am, surly and far from attractive. The only answer to the problem 
that occurred to me was this. When I paid my morning visits to this house 
I used as a rule to be seized with a desire to clear my throat as I went up the 
stairs and the product of my expectoration would fall on the staircase. For 
on neither of these floors was there a spittoon; and the view I took was that 
the cleanliness of the stairs should not be maintained at my expense but 
should be made possible by the provision of a spittoon. The concierge, an 
equally elderly and surly woman (but of cleanly instincts, as I was prepared 
to admit), looked at the matter in a different light. She would lie in wait for 
me to see whether I should again make free of the stairs, and, if she found 
that I did, I used to hear her grumbling audibly; and for several days after- 
wards she would omit the usual greeting when we met. The day before I 



D. Typical Dreams 


259 


had the dream the concierge’s party had received a reinforcement in the 
shape of the maid-servant. I had, as usual, concluded my hurried visit to 
the patient, when the servant stopped me in the hall and remarked: ‘You 
might have wiped your boots, doctor, before you came into the room today. 
You’ve made the red carpet all dirty again with your feet.’ This was the only 
claim the staircase and the maid-servant had to appearing in my dream. 

There was an internal connection between my running up the stairs 
and my spitting on the stairs. Pharyngitis as well as heart trouble are both 
regarded as punishments for the vice of smoking. And on account of that 
habit my reputation for tidiness was not of the highest with the authori- 
ties in my own house any more than in the other; so that the two were 
fused into one in the dream. 

I must postpone my further interpretation of this dream till I can ex- 
plain the origin of the typical dream of being incompletely dressed. I will 
only point out as a provisional conclusion to be drawn from the present 
dream that a sensation of inhibited movement in dreams is produced 
whenever the particular context requires it. The cause of this part of the 
dream’s content cannot have been that some special modification in my 
powers of movement had occurred during my sleep, since only a moment 
earlier I had seen myself (almost as though to confirm this fact) running 
nimbly up the stairs . 1 


(D) 

TYPICAL DREAMS 

We are not in general in a position to interpret another person’s dream 
unless he is prepared to communicate to us the unconscious thoughts that 
lie behind its content. The practical applicability of our method of inter- 
preting dreams is in consequence severely restricted . 2 We have seen that, 
as a general rule, each person is at liberty to construct his dream-world 
according to his individual peculiarities and so to make it unintelligible to 


1 [The feeling of inhibition in dreams is discussed at length on pp. 350 ff. The 
present dream is further analysed on pp. 265 f. It was reported in a letter to 
Fliess of May 3 1 , 1897. (Freud, 1950a, Letter 64.)] 

2 \Footnote added 1925:] This assertion that our method of interpreting dreams 
cannot be applied unless we have access to the dreamer’s associative material re- 
quires supplementing: our interpretative activity is in one instance independent 




260 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


other people. It now appears, however, that, in complete contrast to this, 
there are a certain number of dreams which almost everyone has dreamt 
alike and which we are accustomed to assume must have the same mean- 
ing for everyone. A special interest attaches, moreover, to these typical 
dreams because they presumably arise from the same sources in every case 
and thus seem particularly well qualified to throw light on the sources of 
dreams. 

It is therefore with quite particular anticipations that we shall attempt 
to apply our technique of dream-interpretation to these typical dreams; 
and it is with great reluctance that we shall have to confess that our art 
disappoints our expectations precisely in relation to this material. If we 
attempt to interpret a typical dream, the dreamer fails as a rule to produce 
the associations which would in other cases have led us to understand it, 
or else his associations become obscure and insufficient so that we cannot 
solve our problem with their help. We shall learn in a later portion of this 
work [Section E of Chapter VI, pp. 363 ff.] why this is so and how we 
can make up for this defect in our technique. My readers will also dis- 
cover why it is that at the present point I am able to deal only with a few 
members of the group of typical dreams and must postpone my consid- 
eration of the rest until this later point in my discussion. [See pp. 394 ff.] 1 


( a ) Embarrassing Dreams of Being Naked 

Dreams of being naked or insufficiently dressed in the presence of 
strangers sometimes occur with the additional feature of there being a 
complete absence of any such feeling as shame on the dreamer’s part. We 


of these associations — if, namely, the dreamer has employed symbolic elements 
in the content of the dream. In such cases we make use of what is, strictly speak- 
ing, a second and auxiliary method of dream-interpretation. (See below [pp. 371 
f ].) [In the edition of 1911 only, the following footnote appeared at this point: 
'Apart from cases in which the dreamer makes use of symbols which are familiar 
to us for the purpose of representing his latent dream-thoughts (see below).’] 

1 [This paragraph in its present form dates from 1914. It was in the edition of that 
year (the fourth) that the section on symbolism was added to Chapter VI. This 
led to considerable alterations in the present section, much of the material in 
which was transferred to the new section. (See Editor’s Introduction, p. xiii.)] 




D. Typical Dreams 


261 


are only concerned here, however, with those dreams of being naked in 
which one does feel shame and embarrassment and tries to escape or hide, 
and is then overcome by a strange inhibition which prevents one from 
moving and makes one feel incapable of altering one’s distressing situa- 
tion. It is only with this accompaniment that the dream is typical; with- 
out it, the gist of its subject-matter may be included in every variety of 
context or may be ornamented with individual trimmings. Its essence [in 
its typical form] lies in a distressing feeling in the nature of shame and in 
the fact that one wishes to hide one’s nakedness, as a rule by locomotion, 
but finds one is unable to do so. I believe the great majority of my readers 
will have found themselves in this situation in dreams. 

The nature of the undress involved is customarily far from clear. The 
dreamer may say ‘I was in my chemise,’ but this is rarely a distinct picture. 
The kind of undress is usually so vague that the description is expressed as 
an alternative: ‘I was in my chemise or petticoat.’ As a rule the defect in 
the dreamer’s toilet is not so grave as to appear to justify the shame to 
which it gives rise. In the case of a man who has worn the Emperor’s uni- 
form, nakedness is often replaced by some breach of the dress regulations: 
'1 was walking in the street without my sabre and saw some officers com- 
ing up,’ or ‘I was without my necktie,’ or ‘I was wearing civilian check 
trousers,’ and so on. 

The people in whose presence one feels ashamed are almost always 
strangers, with their features left indeterminate. In the typical dream it 
never happens that the clothing which causes one so much embarrass- 
ment is objected to or so much as noticed by the onlookers. On the con- 
trary, they adopt indifferent or (as I observed in one particularly clear 
dream) solemn and stiff expressions of face. This is a suggestive point. 

The embarrassment of the dreamer and the indifference of the onlook- 
ers offer us, when taken together, a contradiction of the kind that is so com- 
mon in dreams. It would after all be more in keeping with the dreamer’s 
feelings if strangers looked at him in astonishment and derision or with in- 
dignation. But this objectionable feature of the situation has, I believe, been 
got rid of by wish-fulfilment, whereas some force has led to the retention 
of the other features; and the two portions of the dream are consequently 
out of harmony with each other. We possess an interesting piece of evidence 
that the dream in the form in which it appears — partly distorted by wish- 
fulfilment — has not been rightly understood. For it has become the basis 
of a fairy tale which is familiar to us all in Hans Andersen’s version, The 



262 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


Emperor’s Neiv Clothes, and which has quite recently been put into verse by 
Ludwig Fulda 1 in his [‘dramatic fairy tale’] Der Talisman. Hans Andersen’s 
fairy tale tells us how two impostors weave the Emperor a costly garment 
which, they say, will be visible only to persons of virtue and loyalty. The 
Emperor walks out in this invisible garment, and all the spectators, intimi- 
dated by the fabric’s power to act as a touchstone, pretend not to notice the 
Emperor’s nakedness. 

This is just the situation in our dream. It is hardly rash to assume that 
the unintelligibility of the dream’s content as it exists in the memory has 
led to its being recast in a form designed to make sense of the situation. 
That situation, however, is in the process deprived of its original meaning 
and put to extraneous uses. But, as we shall see later, it is a common thing 
for the conscious thought-activity of a second psychical system to misun- 
derstand the content of a dream in this way, and this misunderstanding 
must be regarded as one of the factors in determining the final form as- 
sumed by dreams . 2 Moreover we shall learn that similar misunderstandings 
(taking place, once again, within one and the same psychical personality) 
play a major part in the construction of obsessions and phobias. 

In the case of our dream we are in a position to indicate the material 
upon which the misinterpretation is based. The impostor is the dream 
and the Emperor is the dreamer himself; the moralizing purpose of the 
dream reveals an obscure knowledge of the fact that the latent dream- 
content is concerned with forbidden wishes that have fallen victim to re- 
pression. For the context in which dreams of this sort appear during my 
analyses of neurotics leaves no doubt that they are based upon memories 
from earliest childhood. It is only in our childhood that we are seen in in- 
adequate clothing both by members of our family and by strangers — 
nurses, maid-servants, and visitors; and it is only then that we feel no 
shame at our nakedness . 3 We can observe how undressing has an almost 
intoxicating effect on many children even in their later years, instead of 
making them feel ashamed. They laugh and jump about and slap them- 
selves, while their mother, or whoever else may be there, reproves them 


1 [German playwright, 1862-1939.] 

2 [This process of ‘secondary revision’ forms the subject of Section I of Chapter 
VI (pp. 493 ffi). Its application to this same fairy tale is discussed in a letter to 
Fliess of July 7, 1897 (Freud, 1950/7, Letter 66).] 

3 A child plays a part in the fairy tale as well; for it was a small child who suddenly 
exclaimed: ‘But he has nothing on!’ 




D. Typical Dreams 


263 


and says: ‘Ugh! Shocking! You mustn’t ever do that!’ Children frequently 
manifest a desire to exhibit. One can scarcely pass through a country vil- 
lage in our part of the world without meeting some child of two or three 
who lifts up his little shirt in front of one — in one’s honour, perhaps. 
One of my patients has a conscious memory of a scene in his eighth year, 
when at bed-time he wanted to dance into the next room where his little 
sister slept, dressed in his nightshirt, but was prevented by his nurse. In 
the early history of neurotics an important part is played by exposure to 
children of the opposite sex; in paranoia delusions of being observed 
while dressing and undressing are to be traced back to experiences of this 
kind; while among persons who have remained at the stage of perversion 
there is one class in which this infantile impulse has reached the pitch of 
a symptom — the class of ‘exhibitionists.’ 1 

When we look back at this unashamed period of childhood it seems 
to us a Paradise; and Paradise itself is no more than a group phantasy of 
the childhood of the individual. That is why mankind were naked in Par- 
adise and were without shame in one another’s presence; till a moment 
arrived when shame and anxiety awoke, expulsion followed, and sexual 
life and the tasks of cultural activity began. But we can regain this Para- 
dise every night in our dreams. I have already [p. 239] expressed a suspi- 
cion that impressions of earliest childhood (that is, from the prehistoric 
epoch until about the end of the third year of life) strive to achieve repro- 
duction, from their very nature and irrespectively perhaps of their actual 
content, and that their repetition constitutes the fulfilment of a wish. 
Thus dreams of being naked are dreams of exhibiting. 2 

The core of a dream of exhibiting lies in the figure of the dreamer 
himself (not as he was as a child but as he appears at the present time) and 
his inadequate clothing (which emerges indistinctly, whether owing to su- 
perimposed layers of innumerable later memories of being in undress or 


1 [This allusion to the perversions as remnants of infantile sexual activity foreshad- 
ows Freud’s analysis of the sexual instinct in his Three Essays (1950 d)l\ 

2 \Footnote added 1911:] Ferenczi [1910] has recorded a number of interesting 
dreams of being naked dreamt by women. There was no difficulty in tracing 
these back to the infantile desire to exhibit; but they differed in some respects 
from the ‘typical’ dreams of being naked which I have discussed in the text. — 
[The penultimate sentence in the paragraph above seems to adumbrate some of 
the ideas put forward twenty years later in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (Freud, 
1920*).] 




264 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


as a result of the censorship) . Added to these are the figures of the people 
in whose presence the dreamer feels ashamed. I know of no instance in 
which the actual spectators of the infantile scene of exhibiting have ap- 
peared in the dream; a dream is scarcely ever a simple memory. Curiously 
enough, the people upon whom our sexual interest was directed in child- 
hood are omitted in all the reproductions which occur in dreams, in hys- 
teria and in obsessional neurosis. It is only in paranoia that these 
spectators reappear and, though they remain invisible, their presence is 
inferred with fanatical conviction. What takes their place in dreams — ‘a 
lot of strangers’ who take no notice of the spectacle that is offered — is 
nothing more nor less than the wishful contrary of the single familiar in- 
dividual before whom the dreamer exposed himself. Incidentally, ‘a lot of 
strangers’ frequently appear in dreams in many other connections, and 
they always stand as the wishful contrary of ‘secrecy.’ 1 It is to be noticed 
that even in paranoia, where the original state of things is restored, this 
reversal into a contrary is observed. The subject feels that he is no longer 
alone, he has no doubt that he is being observed, but the observers are ‘a 
lot of strangers’ whose identity is left curiously vague. 

In addition to this, repression plays a part in dreams of exhibiting; for 
the distress felt in such dreams is a reaction on the part of the second sys- 
tem against the content of the scene of exhibiting having found expres- 
sion in spite of the ban upon it. If the distress was to be avoided, the scene 
should never have been revived. 

We shall return later [pp. 350 ff.] to the feeling of being inhibited. It 
serves admirably in dreams to represent a conflict in the will or a negative. 
The unconscious purpose requires the exhibiting to proceed; the censor- 
ship demands that it shall be stopped. 

There can be no doubt that the connections between our typical 
dreams and fairy tales and the material of other kinds of creative writing 
are neither few nor accidental. It sometimes happens that the sharp eye of 
a creative writer has an analytic realization of the process of transformation 
of which he is habitually no more than the tool. If so, he may follow the 
process in a reverse direction and so trace back the imaginative writing to 
a dream. One of my friends has drawn my attention to the following pas- 


1 [This point is also mentioned towards the end of Freud’s paper on ‘Screen Mem- 
ories’ (1899a ). — Footnote added 1909:] For obvious reasons the presence of ‘the 
whole family’ in a dream has the same significance. 




D. Typical Dreams 


265 


sage in Gottfried Keller’s Der grime Heinrich [Part III, Chapter 2]: ‘I hope, 
my dear Lee, that you may never learn from your own personal experience 
the peculiar and piquant truth of the plight of Odysseus when he ap- 
peared, naked and covered with mud, before the eyes of Nausicaa and her 
maidens! Shall I tell you how that can happen? Let us look into our exam- 
ple. If you are wandering about in a foreign land, far from your home and 
from all that you hold dear, if you have seen and heard many things, have 
known sorrow and care, and are wretched and forlorn, then without fail 
you will dream one night that you are coming near to your home; you will 
see it gleaming and shining in the fairest colours, and the sweetest, dearest 
and most beloved forms will move towards you. Then suddenly you will 
become aware that you are in rags, naked and dusty. You will be seized 
with a nameless shame and dread, you will seek to find covering and to 
hide yourself, and you will awake bathed in sweat. This, so long as men 
breathe, is the dream of the unhappy wanderer; and Homer has evoked 
the picture of his plight from the deepest and eternal nature of man.’ 

The deepest and eternal nature of man, upon whose evocation in his 
hearers the poet is accustomed to rely, lies in those impulses of the mind 
which have their roots in a childhood that has since become prehistoric. 
Suppressed and forbidden wishes from childhood break through in the 
dream behind the exile’s unobjectionable wishes which are capable of en- 
tering consciousness; and that is why the dream which finds concrete ex- 
pression in the legend of Nausicaa ends as a rule as an anxiety-dream. 

My own dream (recorded on p. 257 f.) of running upstairs and of soon 
afterwards finding myself glued to the steps was equally a dream of exhibit- 
ing, since it bears the essential marks of being one. It should be possible, 
therefore, to trace it back to experiences during my childhood, and if these 
could be discovered they should enable us to judge how far the maid- 
servant’s behaviour to me — her accusing me of dirtying the carpet — helped 
to give her her place in my dream. I can, as it happens, provide the neces- 
sary particulars. In a psycho-analysis one learns to interpret propinquity in 
time as representing connection in subject-matter. [See below, p. 330.] Two 
thoughts which occur in immediate sequence without any apparent con- 
nection are in fact part of a single unity which has to be discovered; in just 
the same way if I write an ‘o' and a ‘ti in succession, they have to be pro- 
nounced as a single syllable ‘ ab .’ The same is true of dreams. The staircase 
dream to which 1 have referred was one of a series of dreams; and I under- 
stood the interpretation of the other members of the series. Since this par- 
ticular dream was surrounded by the others it must have dealt with the 



266 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


same subject. Now these other dreams were based on a recollection of a 
nurse in whose charge I had been from some date during my earliest in- 
fancy till I was two and a half. 1 even retain an obscure conscious memory 
of her. According to what I was told not long ago by my mother, she was 
old and ugly, but very sharp and efficient. From what I can infer from my 
own dreams her treatment of me was not always excessive in its amiability 
and her words could be harsh if I failed to reach the required standard of 
cleanliness. And thus the maid-servant, since she had undertaken the job 
of carrying on this educational work, acquired the right to be treated in my 
dream as a reincarnation of the prehistoric old nurse. It is reasonable to sup- 
pose that the child loved the old woman who taught him these lessons, in 
spite of her rough treatment of him. 1 * * 4 


(/ 3 ) Dreams of the Death of Persons of 
Whom the Dreamer is Fond 

Another group of dreams which may be described as typical are those 
containing the death of some loved relative — for instance, of a parent, of 
a brother or sister, or of a child. Two classes of such dreams must at once 
be distinguished: those in which the dreamer is unaffected by grief, so 
that on awakening he is astonished at his lack of feeling, and those in 
which the dreamer feels deeply pained by the death and may even weep 
bitterly in his sleep. 

We need not consider the dreams of the first of these classes, for they 
have no claim to be regarded as ‘typical.’ If we analyse them, we find that 
they have some meaning other than their apparent one, and that they are 
intended to conceal some other wish. Such was the dream of the aunt 
who saw her sister’s only son lying in his coffin. (See pp. 176 f.) It did not 
mean that she wished her little nephew dead; as we have seen, it merely 


1 Here is an ‘over-interpretation’ of the same dream. Since ‘spuken [haunting]’ is 

an activity of spirits, ‘ spucken [spitting] on the stairs’ might be loosely rendered 

as ‘ esprit d’escalier.' This last phrase is equivalent to lack of ready repartee 
[‘ Schlagfertigkeit,’ literally ‘readiness to strike’] — a failing to which I must in fact 
plead guilty. Was my nurse, I wonder, equally wanting in that quality? [This 
nurse is referred to at the end of Chapter IV of The Psychopathology of Everyday 
Life (Freud, 1901 b) and in greater detail in his letters to Fliess of October 3 and 

4 and October 15, 1897 (Freud, 1950a, Letters 70 and 71).] 




D. Typical Dreams 


267 


concealed a wish to see a particular person of whom she was fond and 
whom she had not met for a long time — a person whom she had once 
before met after a similarly long interval beside the coffin of another 
nephew. This wish, which was the true content of the dream, gave no oc- 
casion for grief, and no grief, therefore, was felt in the dream. It will be 
noticed that the affect felt in the dream belongs to its latent and not to 
its manifest content, and that the dream’s affective content has remained 
untouched by the distortion which has overtaken its ideational content. 1 

Very different are the dreams of the other class — those in which the 
dreamer imagines the death of a loved relative and is at the same time 
painfully affected. The meaning of such dreams, as their content indi- 
cates, is a wish that the person in question may die. And since I must ex- 
pect that the feelings of all of my readers and any others who have 
experienced similar dreams will rebel against my assertion, I must try to 
base my evidence for it on the broadest possible foundation. 

I have already discussed a dream which taught us that the wishes 
which are represented in dreams as fulfilled are not always present-day 
wishes. They may also be wishes of the past which have been abandoned, 
overlaid and repressed, and to which we have to attribute some sort of 
continued existence only because of their re-emergence in a dream. They 
are not dead in our sense of the word but only like the shades in the 
Odyssey, which awoke to some sort of life as soon as they had tasted 
blood. In the dream of the dead child in the ‘case’ (pp. 177 f.) what was 
involved was a wish which had been an immediate one fifteen years ear- 
lier and was frankly admitted as having existed at that time. I may add — 
and this may not be without its bearing upon the theory of dreams — that 
even behind this wish there lay a memory from the dreamer’s earliest 
childhood. When she was a small child — the exact date could not be fixed 
with certainty — she had heard that her mother had fallen into a deep de- 
pression during the pregnancy of which she had been the fruit and had 
passionately wished that the child she was bearing might die. When the 
dreamer herself was grown-up and pregnant, she merely followed her 
mother’s example. 

If anyone dreams, with every sign of pain, that his father or mother or 
brother or sister has died, I should never use the dream as evidence that 


1 [See the discussion on affects in dreams in Chapter VII, Section H (especially 

p. 469).] 




268 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


he wishes for that person’s death at the present time. The theory of dreams 
does not require as much as that; it is satisfied with the inference that this 
death has been wished for at some time or other during the dreamer’s 
childhood. I fear, however, that this reservation will not appease the ob- 
jectors; they will deny the possibility of their ever having had such a 
thought with just as much energy as they insist that they harbour no such 
wishes now. I must therefore reconstruct a portion of the vanished mental 
life of children on the basis of the evidence of the present. 1 

Let us first consider the relation of children to their brothers and sis- 
ters. I do not know why we presuppose that that relation must be a loving 
one; for instances of hostility between adult brothers and sisters force 
themselves upon everyone’s experience and we can often establish the fact 
that the disunity originated in childhood or has always existed. But it is 
further true that a great many adults, who are on affectionate terms with 
their brothers and sisters and are ready to stand by them today, passed 
their childhood on almost unbroken terms of enmity with them. The 
elder child ill-treats the younger, maligns him and robs him of his toys; 
while the younger is consumed with impotent rage against the elder, en- 
vies and fears him, or meets his oppressor with the first stirrings of a love 
of liberty and a sense of justice. Their parents complain that the children 
do not get on with one another, but cannot discover why. It is easy to see 
that the character of even a good child is not what we should wish to find 
it in an adult. Children are completely egoistic; they feel their needs in- 
tensely and strive ruthlessly to satisfy them — especially as against the ri- 
vals, other children, and first and foremost as against their brothers and 
sisters. But we do not on that account call a child ‘bad,’ we call him 
‘naughty’; he is no more answerable for his evil deeds in our judgement 
than in the eyes of the law. And it is right that this should be so; for we 
may expect that, before the end of the period which we count as child- 
hood, altruistic impulses and morality will awaken in the little egoist and 
(to use Meynert’s terms [e.g. 1892, 169 ff.]) a secondary ego will overlay 
and inhibit the primary one. It is true, no doubt, that morality does not 
set in simultaneously all along the line and that the length of non-moral 
childhood varies in different individuals. If this morality fails to develop, 


1 [ Footnote added 1909:] Cf. my ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’ 
(1909 b) and my paper ‘On the Sexual Theories of Children’ (1908c). 




D. Typical Dreams 


269 


we like to talk of ‘degeneracy,’ though what in fact faces us is an inhibi- 
tion in development. After the primary character has already been over- 
laid by later development, it can still be laid bare again, at all events in 
part, in cases of hysterical illness. There is a really striking resemblance 
between what is known as the hysterical character and that of a naughty 
child. Obsessional neurosis, on the contrary, corresponds to a super- 
morality imposed as a reinforcing weight upon fresh stirrings of the pri- 
mary character. 

Many people, therefore, who love their brothers and sisters and would 
feel bereaved if they were to die, harbour evil wishes against them in their 
unconscious, dating from earlier times; and these are capable of being 
realized in dreams. 

It is of quite particular interest, however, to observe the behaviour of 
small children up to the age of two or three or a little older towards their 
younger brothers and sisters. Here, for instance, was a child who had so 
far been the only one; and now he was told that the stork had brought a 
new baby. He looked the new arrival up and down and then declared de- 
cisively: ‘The stork can take him away again!’ 1 I am quite seriously of the 
opinion that a child can form a just estimate of the set-back he has to ex- 
pect at the hands of the little stranger. A lady of my acquaintance, who is 
on very good terms today with a sister four years her junior, tells me that 
she greeted the news of her first arrival with this qualification: ‘But all the 
same I shan’t give her my red cap!’ Even if a child only comes to realize 
the situation later on, his hostility will date from that moment. I know of 
a case in which a little girl of less than three tried to strangle an infant in 
its cradle because she felt that its continued presence boded her no good. 
Children at that time of life are capable of jealousy of any degree of in- 
tensity and obviousness. Again, if it should happen that the baby sister 
does in fact disappear after a short while, the elder child will find the 
whole affection of the household once more concentrated upon himself. 


1 [Footnote added 1909:] The three-and-a-half-year-old Hans (whose phobia was 
the subject of the analysis mentioned in the preceding footnote) exclaimed 
shortly after the birth of a sister, while he was suffering from a feverish sore 
throat: ‘I don’t want a baby sister!’ [Freud, 1909£, Section I.] During his neuro- 
sis eighteen months later he frankly confessed to a wish that his mother might 
drop the baby into the bath so that she would die. [Ibid., Section H (April 1 1).] 
At the same time, Hans was a good-natured and affectionate child, who soon 
grew fond of this same sister and particularly enjoyed taking her under his wing. 




270 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


If after that the stork should bring yet another baby, it seems only logical 
that the little favourite should nourish a wish that his new competitor 
may meet with the same fate as the earlier one, so that he himself may be 
as happy as he was originally and during the interval . 1 Normally, of 
course, this attitude of a child towards a younger brother or sister is a 
simple function of the difference between their ages. Where the gap in 
time is sufficiently long, an elder girl will already begin to feel the stirring 
of her maternal instincts towards the helpless new-born baby. 

Hostile feelings towards brothers and sisters must be far more frequent 
in childhood than the unseeing eye of the adult observer can perceive . 2 

In the case of my own children, who followed each other in rapid suc- 
cession, I neglected the opportunity of carrying out observations of this 
kind; but I am now making up for this neglect by observing a small 
nephew, whose autocratic rule was upset, after lasting for fifteen months, 
by the appearance of a female rival. I am told, it is true, that the young 
man behaves in the most chivalrous manner to his little sister, that he 
kisses her hand and strokes her; but I have been able to convince myself 
that even before the end of his second year he made use of his powers of 
speech for the purpose of criticizing someone whom he could not fail to 
regard as superfluous. Whenever the conversation touched upon her he 
used to intervene in it and exclaim petulantly: ‘Too ’ickle! too ’ickle!’ 
During the last few months the baby’s growth has made enough progress 
to place her beyond this particular ground for contempt, and the little 
boy has found a different basis for his assertion that she does not deserve 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] Deaths that are experienced in this way in childhood 
may quickly be forgotten in the family; but psychoanalytic research shows that 
they have a very important influence on subsequent neuroses. 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] Since this was written, a large number of observations 
have been made and recorded in the literature of psycho-analysis upon the origi- 
nally hostile attitude of children towards their brothers and sisters and one of 
their parents. The [Swiss] author and poet Spitteler has given us a particularly 
genuine and naive account of this childish attitude, derived from his own child- 
hood [1914,40]: ‘Moreover there was a second Adolf there: a little creature who 
they alleged was my brother, though I could not see what use he was and still less 
why they made as much fuss of him as of me myself. I was sufficient so far as I 
was concerned; why should I want a brother? And he was not merely useless, he 
was positively in the way. When I pestered my grandmother, he wanted to pester 
her too. When I was taken out in the perambulator, he sat opposite to me and 
took up half the space, so that we were bound to kick each other with our feet.’ 




D. Typical Dreams 


271 


so much attention: at every suitable opportunity he draws attention to 
the fact that she has no teeth . 1 We all of us recollect how the eldest girl of 
another of my sisters, who was then a child of six, spent half-an-hour in 
insisting upon each of her aunts in succession agreeing with her: ‘Lucie 
can’t understand that yet, can she?’ she kept asking. Lucie was her rival — 
two and a half years her junior. 

In none of my women patients, to take an example, have I failed to 
come upon this dream of the death of a brother or sister, which tallies 
with an increase in hostility. I have only found a single exception; and it 
was easy to interpret this as a confirmation of the rule. On one occasion 
during an analytic session I was explaining this subject to a lady, since 
in view of her symptom its discussion seemed to me relevant. To my as- 
tonishment she replied that she had never had such a dream. Another 
dream, however, occurred to her, which ostensibly had no connection 
with the topic — a dream which she had first dreamt when she was four 
years old and at that time the youngest of the family, and which she had 
dreamt repeatedly since: A whole crowd of children — all her brothers, sisters 
and cousins of both sexes — were romping in a field. Suddenly they all greiv 
wings, flew away and disappeared. She had no idea what this dream meant; 
but it is not hard to recognize that in its original form it had been a dream 
of the death of all her brothers and sisters, and had been only slightly in- 
fluenced by the censorship. I may venture to suggest the following analy- 
sis. On the occasion of the death of one of this crowd of children (in this 
instance the children of two brothers had been brought up together as a 
single family) the dreamer, not yet four years old at the time, must have 
asked some wise grown-up person what became of children when they 
were dead. The reply must have been: ‘They grow wings and turn into 
little angels.’ In the dream which followed upon this piece of information 
all the dreamer’s brothers and sisters had wings like angels and — which is 
the main point — flew away. Our little baby-killer was left alone, strange 
to say: the only survivor of the whole crowd! We can hardly be wrong in 
supposing that the fact of the children romping in a field before flying 
away points to butterflies. It is as though the child was led by the same 
chain of thought as the peoples of antiquity to picture the soul as having 
a butterfly’s wings. 


1 [Foomote added 1909:] Little Hans, when he was three and a half, gave vent to a 
crushing criticism of his sister in the same words. It was because of her lack of 
teeth, he supposed, that she was unable to talk. [Freud, 1909^, Section I.] 




272 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


At this point someone will perhaps interrupt: ‘Granted that children 
have hostile impulses towards their brothers and sisters, how can a child’s 
mind reach such a pitch of depravity as to wish for the death of his rivals 
or of playmates stronger than himself, as though the death penalty were 
the only punishment for every crime?’ Anyone who talks like this has 
failed to bear in mind that a child’s idea of being ‘dead’ has nothing 
much in common with ours apart from the word. Children know noth- 
ing of the horrors of corruption, of freezing in the ice-cold grave, of the 
terrors of eternal nothingness — ideas which grown-up people find it so 
hard to tolerate, as is proved by all the myths of a future life. The fear of 
death has no meaning to a child; hence it is that he will play with the 
dreadful word and use it as a threat against a playmate: ‘If you do that 
again, you’ll die, like Franz!’ Meanwhile the poor mother gives a shudder 
and remembers, perhaps, that the greater half of the human race fail to 
survive their childhood years. It was actually possible for a child, who was 
over eight years old at the time, coming home from a visit to the Natural 
History Museum, to say to his mother: ‘I’m so fond of you, Mummy: 
when you die I’ll have you stuffed and I’ll keep you in this room, so that 
I can see you all the time.’ So little resemblance is there between a child’s 
idea of being dead and our own ! 1 

To children, who, moreover, are spared the sight of the scenes of suf- 
fering which precede death, being ‘dead’ means approximately the same 
as being ‘gone’ — not troubling the survivors any longer. A child makes no 
distinction as to how this absence is brought about: whether it is due to 
a journey, to a dismissal, to an estrangement, or to death . 2 If, during a 
child’s prehistoric epoch, his nurse has been dismissed, and if soon after- 


1 [ Footnote added 1909:] I was astonished to hear a highly intelligent boy of ten 
remark after the sudden death of his father: ‘I know father’s dead, but what I 
can’t understand is why he doesn’t come home to supper.’ — [ Added 1919:] Fur- 
ther material on this subject will be found in the first [seven] volumes of the pe- 
riodical Imago [1912-21], under the standing rubric of ‘Vom wahren Wesen der 
Kinderseele ’ [‘The True Nature of the Child Mind’], edited by Frau Dr. H. von 
Hug-Hellmuth. 

2 [ Footnote added 1919:] An observation made by a parent who had a knowledge 
of psycho-analysis caught the actual moment at which his highly intelligent 
four-year-old daughter perceived the distinction between being ‘gone’ and being 
‘dead.’ The little girl had been troublesome at meal-time and noticed that one 
of the maids at the pension where they were staying was looking at her askance. 




D. Typical Dreams 


273 


wards his mother has died, the two events are superimposed on each 
other in a single series in his memory as revealed in analysis. When people 
are absent, children do not miss them with any great intensity; many 
mothers have learnt this to their sorrow when, after being away from 
home for some weeks on a summer holiday, they are met on their return 
by the news that the children have not once asked after their mummy. If 
their mother does actually make the journey to that ‘undiscover’d coun- 
try, from whose bourn no traveller returns,’ children seem at first to have 
forgotten her, and it is only later on that they begin to call their dead 
mother to mind. 

Thus if a child has reasons for wishing the absence of another, there is 
nothing to restrain him from giving his wish the form of the other child 
being dead. And the psychical reaction to dreams containing death- 
wishes proves that, in spite of the different content of these wishes in the 
case of children, they are nevertheless in some way or other the same as 
wishes expressed in the same terms by adults . 1 

If, then, a child’s death-wishes against his brothers and sisters are ex- 
plained by the childish egoism which makes him regard them as his rivals, 
how are we to explain his death-wishes against his parents, who surround 
him with love and fulfil his needs and whose preservation that same ego- 
ism should lead him to desire? 

A solution of this difficulty is afforded by the observation that dreams 
of the death of parents apply with preponderant frequency to the parent 
who is of the same sex as the dreamer: that men, that is, dream mostly of 
their father’s death and women of their mother’s. I cannot pretend that 
this is universally so, but the preponderance in the direction I have indi- 
cated is so evident that it requires to be explained by a factor of general 


‘I wish Josefine was dead,’ was the child’s comment to her father. ‘Why dead?’ 
enquired her father soothingly; ‘wouldn’t it do if she went away?’ ‘No,’ replied 
the child; ‘then she’d come back again.’ The unbounded self-love (the narcis- 
sism) of children regards any interference as an act of lese majeste\ and their feel- 
ings demand (like the Draconian code) that any such crime shall receive the one 
form of punishment which admits of no degrees. 

1 [The adult attitude to death is discussed by Freud more particularly in the second 
essay ofhis Totem and Taboo (1912-13), Section 3(c), in his paper on ‘The Three 
Caskets’ (1913/) and in the second part of his ‘Thoughts on War and Death’ 

(19156).] 



274 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


importance . 1 It is as though — to put it bluntly — a sexual preference were 
making itself felt at an early age: as though boys regarded their fathers and 
girls their mothers as their rivals in love, whose elimination could not fail 
to be to their advantage. 

Before this idea is rejected as a monstrous one, it is as well in this case, 
too, to consider the real relations obtaining — this time between parents 
and children. We must distinguish between what the cultural standards 
of filial piety demand of this relation and what everyday observation 
shows it in fact to be. More than one occasion for hostility lies concealed 
in the relation between parents and children — a relation which affords 
the most ample opportunities for wishes to arise which cannot pass the 
censorship. 

Let us consider first the relation between father and son. The sanctity 
which we attribute to the rules laid down in the Decalogue has, I think, 
blunted our powers of perceiving the real facts. We seem scarcely to ven- 
ture to observe that the majority of mankind disobey the Fifth Command- 
ment. Alike in the lowest and in the highest strata of human society filial 
piety is wont to give way to other interests. The obscure information 
which is brought to us by mythology and legend from the primaeval ages 
of human society gives an unpleasing picture of the father’s despotic power 
and of the ruthlessness with which he made use of it. Kronos devoured his 
children, just as the wild boar devours the sow’s litter; while Zeus emascu- 
lated his father 2 and made himself ruler in his place. The more unre- 
stricted was the rule of the father in the ancient family, the more must the 
son, as his destined successor, have found himself in the position of an en- 
emy, and the more impatient must he have been to become ruler himself 
through his father’s death. Even in our middle-class families fathers are as 
a rule inclined to refuse their sons independence and the means necessary 


1 [ Footnote added 1925:] The situation is often obscured by the emergence of a 
self-punitive impulse, which threatens the dreamer, by way of a moral reaction, 
with the loss of the parent whom he loves. 

2 [ Footnote added 1909:] Or so he is reported to have done according to some 
myths. According to others, emasculation was only carried out by Kronos on his 
father Uranus. [This passage is discussed in Chapter X (3) of The Psychopathology 
of Everyday Life (Freud, 1901^).] For the mythological significance of this theme, 
cf. Rank, 1909, [added 1914:] and Rank, 1912c, Chapter IX, Section 2. — 
[These sentences in the text are, of course, an early hint at the line of thought 
developed later by Freud in his Totem and Taboo (1912-13).] 




D. Typical Dreams 


275 


to secure it and thus to foster the growth of the germ of hostility which is 
inherent in their relation. A physician will often be in a position to notice 
how a son’s grief at the loss of his father cannot suppress his satisfaction at 
having at length won his freedom. In our society today fathers are apt to 
cling desperately to what is left of a now sadly antiquated potestas patrisfa- 
milias ; and an author who, like Ibsen, brings the immemorial struggle be- 
tween fathers and sons into prominence in his writings may be certain of 
producing his effect. 

Occasions for conflict between a daughter and her mother arise when 
the daughter begins to grow up and long for sexual liberty, but finds her- 
self under her mother’s tutelage; while the mother, on the other hand, is 
warned by her daughter’s growth that the time has come when she herself 
must abandon her claims to sexual satisfaction. 

All of this is patent to the eyes of everyone. But it does not help us in 
our endeavour to explain dreams of a parent’s death in people whose 
piety towards their parents has long been unimpeachably established. Pre- 
vious discussions, moreover, will have prepared us to learn that the death- 
wish against parents dates back to earliest childhood. 

This supposition is confirmed with a certainty beyond all doubt in the 
case of psychoneurotics when they are subjected to analysis. We learn from 
them that a child’s sexual wishes — if in their embryonic stage they deserve 
to be so described — awaken very early, and that a girl’s first affection is for 
her father 1 and a boy’s first childish desires are for his mother. Accordingly, 
the father becomes a disturbing rival to the boy and the mother to the girl; 
and I have already shown in the case of brothers and sisters how easily such 
feelings can lead to a death-wish. The parents too give evidence as a rule of 
sexual partiality: a natural predilection usually sees to it that a man tends 
to spoil his little daughters, while his wife takes her sons’ part; though both 
of them, where their judgement is not disturbed by the magic of sex, keep 
a strict eye upon their children’s education. The child is very well aware of 
this partiality and turns against that one of his parents who is opposed to 
showing it. Being loved by an adult does not merely bring a child the sat- 
isfaction of a special need; it also means that he will get what he wants in 
every other respect as well. Thus he will be following his own sexual in- 
stinct and at the same time giving fresh strength to the inclination shown 
by his parents if his choice between them falls in with theirs. 


1 [Freud’s views on this point were later modified. Cf. Freud, 19257 and 1931 b.] 




276 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


The signs of these infantile preferences are for the most part over- 
looked; yet some of them are to be observed even after the first years of 
childhood. An eight-year-old girl of my acquaintance, if her mother is 
called away from the table, makes use of the occasion to proclaim herself 
her successor: ‘I’m going to be Mummy now. Do you want some more 
greens, Karl? Well, help yourself, then!’ and so on. A particularly gifted 
and lively girl of four, in whom this piece of child psychology is especially 
transparent, declared quite openly: ‘Mummy can go away now. Then 
Daddy must marry me and I’ll be his wife.’ Such a wish occurring in a 
child is not in the least inconsistent with her being tenderly attached to 
her mother. If a little boy is allowed to sleep beside his mother when his 
father is away from home, but has to go back to the nursery and to some- 
one of whom he is far less fond as soon as his father returns, he may easily 
begin to form a wish that his father should always be away, so that he 
himself could keep his place beside his dear, lovely Mummy. One obvious 
way of attaining this wish would be if his father were dead; for the child 
has learnt one thing by experience — namely that ‘dead’ people, such as 
Granddaddy, are always away and never come back. 

Though observations of this kind on small children fit in perfectly 
with the interpretation I have proposed, they do not carry such complete 
conviction as is forced upon the physician by psycho-analyses of adult 
neurotics. In the latter case dreams of the sort we are considering are in- 
troduced into the analysis in such a context that it is impossible to avoid 
interpreting them as wishful dreams. 

One day one of my women patients was in a distressed and tearful 
mood. ‘I don’t want ever to see my relations again,’ she said, ‘they must 
think me horrible.’ She then went on, with almost no transition, to say 
that she remembered a dream, though of course she had no idea what it 
meant. When she was four years old she had a dream that a lynx or fox 1 
was walking on the roof; then something had fallen doivn or she had fallen 
down; and then her mother ivas carried out of the house dead — and she wept 
bitterly. I told her that this dream must mean that when she was a child 
she had wished she could see her mother dead, and that it must be on ac- 
count of the dream that she felt her relations must think her horrible. I 
had scarcely said this when she produced some material which threw light 


1 [The German names for these animals are very much alike: ‘Luchs’ and ‘Fuchs. ’] 




D. Typical Dreams 


277 


on the dream. ‘Lynx-eye’ was a term of abuse that had been thrown at her 
by a street-urchin when she was a very small child. When she was three 
years old, a tile off the roof had fallen on her mother’s head and made it 
bleed violently. 

I once had an opportunity of making a detailed study of a young 
woman who passed through a variety of psychical conditions. Her illness 
began with a state of confusional excitement during which she displayed 
a quite special aversion to her mother, hitting and abusing her whenever 
she came near her bed, while at the same period she was docile and affec- 
tionate towards a sister who was many years her senior. This was followed 
by a state in which she was lucid but somewhat apathetic and suffered 
from badly disturbed sleep. It was during this phase that 1 began treating 
her and analysing her dreams. An immense number of these dreams were 
concerned, with a greater or less degree of disguise, with the death of her 
mother: at one time she would be attending an old woman’s funeral, at 
another she and her sister would be sitting at table dressed in mourning. 
There could be no question as to the meaning of these dreams. As her 
condition improved still further, hysterical phobias developed. The most 
tormenting of these was a fear that something might have happened to 
her mother. She was obliged to hurry home, wherever she might be, to 
convince herself that her mother was still alive. This case, taken in con- 
junction with what 1 had learnt from other sources, was highly instruc- 
tive: it exhibited, translated as it were into different languages, the various 
ways in which the psychical apparatus reacted to one and the same excit- 
ing idea. In the confusional state, in which, as I believe, the second psy- 
chical agency was overwhelmed by the normally suppressed first one, her 
unconscious hostility to her mother found a powerful motor expression. 
When the calmer condition set in, when the rebellion was suppressed and 
the domination of the censorship re-established, the only region left open 
in which her hostility could realize the wish for her mother’s death was 
that of dreaming. When a normal state was still more firmly established, 
it led to the production of her exaggerated worry about her mother as a 
hysterical counter-reaction and defensive phenomenon. In view of this it 
is no longer hard to understand why hysterical girls are so often attached 
to their mothers with such exaggerated affection. 

On another occasion I had an opportunity of obtaining a deep insight 
into the unconscious mind of a young man whose life was made almost 
impossible by an obsessional neurosis. He was unable to go out into the 
street because he was tortured by the fear that he would kill everyone he 



278 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


met. He spent his days in preparing his alibi in case he might be charged 
with one of the murders committed in the town. It is unnecessary to add 
that he was a man of equally high morals and education. The analysis 
(which, incidentally, led to his recovery) showed that the basis of this dis- 
tressing obsession was an impulse to murder his somewhat over-severe 
father. This impulse, to his astonishment, had been consciously expressed 
when he was seven years old, but it had, of course, originated much ear- 
lier in his childhood. After his father’s painful illness and death, the pa- 
tient’s obsessional self-reproaches appeared — he was in his thirty-first year 
at the time — taking the shape of a phobia transferred on to strangers. A 
person, he felt, who was capable of wanting to push his own father over a 
precipice from the top of a mountain was not to be trusted to respect the 
lives of those less closely related to him; he was quite right to shut himself 
up in his room . 1 

In my experience, which is already extensive, the chief part in the 
mental lives of all children who later become psychoneurotics is played 
by their parents. Being in love with the one parent and hating the other 
are among the essential constituents of the stock of psychical impulses 
which is formed at that time and which is of such importance in deter- 
mining the symptoms of the later neurosis. It is not my belief, however, 
that psychoneurotics differ sharply in this respect from other human be- 
ings who remain normal — that they are able, that is, to create something 
absolutely new and peculiar to themselves. It is far more probable — and 
this is confirmed by occasional observations on normal children — that 
they are only distinguished by exhibiting on a magnified scale feelings of 
love and hatred to their parents which occur less obviously and less in- 
tensely in the minds of most children. 

This discovery is confirmed by a legend that has come down to us 
from classical antiquity: a legend whose profound and universal power to 
move can only be understood if the hypothesis I have put forward in re- 
gard to the psychology of children has an equally universal validity. What 
I have in mind is the legend of King Oedipus and Sophocles’ drama 
which bears his name. 

Oedipus, son of Lai'us, King of Thebes, and of Jocasta, was exposed as 
an infant because an oracle had warned Lai'us that the still unborn child 


1 [This patient is referred to again on p. 465.] 




D. Typical Dreams 


279 


would be his father’s murderer. The child was rescued, and grew up as a 
prince in an alien court, until, in doubts as to his origin, he too questioned 
the oracle and was warned to avoid his home since he was destined to mur- 
der his father and take his mother in marriage. On the road leading away 
from what he believed was his home, he met King Lai'us and slew him in a 
sudden quarrel. He came next to Thebes and solved the riddle set him by 
the Sphinx who barred his way. Out of gratitude the Thebans made him 
their king and gave him Jocasta’s hand in marriage. He reigned long in 
peace and honour, and she who, unknown to him, was his mother bore him 
two sons and two daughters. Then at last a plague broke out and the The- 
bans made enquiry once more of the oracle. It is at this point that Sopho- 
cles’ tragedy opens. The messengers bring back the reply that the plague will 
cease when the murderer of Lai'us has been driven from the land. 

But he, where is he? Where shall now be read 

The fading record of this ancient guilt ? 1 

The action of the play consists in nothing other than the process of re- 
vealing, with cunning delays and ever-mounting excitement — a process 
that can be likened to the work of a psycho-analysis — that Oedipus him- 
self is the murderer of Lai'us, but further that he is the son of the mur- 
dered man and of Jocasta. Appalled at the abomination which he has 
unwittingly perpetrated, Oedipus blinds himself and forsakes his home. 
The oracle has been fulfilled. 

Oedipus Rex is what is known as a tragedy of destiny. Its tragic effect is 
said to lie in the contrast between the supreme will of the gods and the 
vain attempts of mankind to escape the evil that threatens them. The les- 
son which, it is said, the deeply moved spectator should learn from the 
tragedy is submission to the divine will and realization of his own impo- 
tence. Modern dramatists have accordingly tried to achieve a similar tragic 
effect by weaving the same contrast into a plot invented by themselves. 
But the spectators have looked on unmoved while a curse or an oracle was 
fulfilled in spite of all the efforts of some innocent man: later tragedies of 
destiny have failed in their effect. 

If Oedipus Rex moves a modern audience no less than it did the contem- 
porary Greek one, the explanation can only be that its effect does not lie in 


1 [Lewis Campbell’s translation (1883), lines 108 £] 




280 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


the contrast between destiny and human will, but is to be looked for in the 
particular nature of the material on which that contrast is exemplified. 
There must be something which makes a voice within us ready to recog- 
nize the compelling force of destiny in the Oedipus , while we can dismiss 
as merely arbitrary such dispositions as are laid down in [Grillparzer’s] Die 
Ahnfrau or other modern tragedies of destiny. And a factor of this kind is 
in fact involved in the story of King Oedipus. His destiny moves us only 
because it might have been ours — because the oracle laid the same curse 
upon us before our birth as upon him. It is the fate of all of us, perhaps, to 
direct our first sexual impulse towards our mother and our first hatred and 
our first murderous wish against our father. Our dreams convince us that 
that is so. King Oedipus, who slew his father La'ius and married his mother 
Jocasta, merely shows us the fulfilment of our own childhood wishes. But, 
more fortunate than he, we have meanwhile succeeded, in so far as we have 
not become psychoneurotics, in detaching our sexual impulses from our 
mothers and in forgetting our jealousy of our fathers. Here is one in whom 
these primaeval wishes of our childhood have been fulfilled, and we shrink 
back from him with the whole force of the repression by which those 
wishes have since that time been held down within us. While the poet, as 
he unravels the past, brings to light the guilt of Oedipus, he is at the same 
time compelling us to recognize our own inner minds, in which those same 
impulses, though suppressed, are still to be found. The contrast with which 
the closing Chorus leaves us confronted — 

. . . Fix on Oedipus your eyes, 

Who resolved the dark enigma, noblest champion and most wise. 

Like a star his envied fortune mounted beaming far and wide: 

Now he sinks in seas of anguish, whelmed beneath a raging tide . . .' 

— strikes as a warning at ourselves and our pride, at us who since our 
childhood have grown so wise and so mighty in our own eyes. Like Oedi- 
pus, we live in ignorance of these wishes, repugnant to morality, which 
have been forced upon us by Nature, and after their revelation we may all 
of us well seek to close our eyes to the scenes of our childhood . 1 2 


1 [Lewis Campbell’s translation, lines 1524 f£] 

2 [Foomote added 1914:] None of the findings of psycho-analytic research has provoked 
such embittered denials, such fierce opposition — or such amusing contortions — on 




D. Typical Dreams 


281 


There is an unmistakable indication in the text of Sophocles’ tragedy it- 
self that the legend of Oedipus sprang from some primaeval dream-material 
which had as its content the distressing disturbance of a child’s relation to 
his parents owing to the first stirrings of sexuality. At a point when Oedi- 
pus, though he is not yet enlightened, has begun to feel troubled by his rec- 
ollection of the oracle, Jocasta consoles him by referring to a dream which 
many people dream, though, as she thinks, it has no meaning: 

Many a man ere now in dreams hath lain 
With her who bare him. He hath least annoy 
Who with such omens troubleth not his mind. 1 

Today, just as then, many men dream of having sexual relations with their 
mothers, and speak of the fact with indignation and astonishment. It is 
clearly the key to the tragedy and the complement to the dream of the 
dreamer’s father being dead. The story of Oedipus is the reaction of the 
imagination to these two typical dreams. And just as these dreams, when 
dreamt by adults, are accompanied by feelings of repulsion, so too the leg- 
end must include horror and self-punishment. Its further modification 
originates once again in a misconceived secondary revision of the material, 
which has sought to exploit it for theological purposes. (Cf. the dream- 
material in dreams of exhibiting, pp. 261 ff.) The attempt to harmonize 


the part of critics as this indication of the childhood impulses towards incest which 
persist in the unconscious. An attempt has even been made recently to make out, 
in the face of all experience, that the incest should only be taken as ‘symbolic.’ — 
Ferenczi (1912) has proposed an ingenious ‘over-interpretation’ of the Oedipus 
myth, based on a passage in one of Schopenhauer’s letters . — [Added 1919:] Later 
studies have shown that the ‘Oedipus complex,’ which was touched upon for the 
first time in the above paragraphs in the Interpretation of Dreams , throws a light of 
undreamt-of importance on the history of the human race and the evolution of re- 
ligion and morality. (See my Totem and Taboo, 1912-13 [Essay IV].) — [Actually the 
gist of this discussion of the Oedipus complex and of the Oediptis Rex, as well as of 
what follows on the subject of Hamlet, had already been put forward by Freud in a 
letter to Fliess as early as October 15th, 1897. (See Freud, 1950a, Letter 71.) A still 
earlier hint at the discovery of the Oedipus complex was included in a letter of May 
31st, 1897. (Ibid., Draft N.) — The actual term ‘Oedipus complex’ seems to have 
been first used by Freud in his published writings in the first of his ‘Contributions 
to the Psychology of Love’ (1910/;).] 

1 [Lewis Campbell’s translation, lines 982 ff.] 




282 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


divine omnipotence with human responsibility must naturally fail in con- 
nection with this subject-matter just as with any other. 

Another of the great creations of tragic poetry, Shakespeare’s Hamlet , has 
its roots in the same soil as Oedipus Rex . 1 But the changed treatment of the 
same material reveals the whole difference in the mental life of these two 
widely separated epochs of civilization: the secular advance of repression in 
the emotional life of mankind. In the Oedipus the child’s wishful phantasy 
that underlies it is brought into the open and realized as it would be in 
a dream. In Hamlet it remains repressed; and — just as in the case of a 
neurosis — we only learn of its existence from its inhibiting consequences. 
Strangely enough, the overwhelming effect produced by the more modern 
tragedy has turned out to be compatible with the fact that people have re- 
mained completely in the dark as to the hero’s character. The play is built 
up on Hamlet’s hesitations over fulfilling the task of revenge that is assigned 
to him; but its text offers no reasons or motives for these hesitations and an 
immense variety of attempts at interpreting them have failed to produce a 
result. According to the view which was originated by Goethe and is still the 
prevailing one today, Hamlet represents the type of man whose power of di- 
rect action is paralysed by an excessive development of his intellect. (He is 
‘sickbed o’er with the pale cast of thought.’) According to another view, the 
dramatist has tried to portray a pathologically irresolute character which 
might be classed as neurasthenic. The plot of the drama shows us, however, 
that Hamlet is far from being represented as a person incapable of taking 
any action. We see him doing so on two occasions: first in a sudden outburst 
of temper, when he runs his sword through the eavesdropper behind the 
arras, and secondly in a premeditated and even crafty fashion, when, with 
all the callousness of a Renaissance prince, he sends the two courtiers to the 
death that had been planned for himself. What is it, then, that inhibits him 
in fulfilling the task set him by his father’s ghost? The answer, once again, is 
that it is the peculiar nature of the task. Hamlet is able to do anything — 
except take vengeance on the man who did away with his father and took 
that father’s place with his mother, the man who shows him the repressed 
wishes of his own childhood realized. Thus the loathing which should drive 
him on to revenge is replaced in him by self-reproaches, by scruples of con- 


1 [This paragraph was printed as a footnote in the first edition (1900) and in- 
cluded in the text from 1914 onward.] 




D. Typical Dreams 


283 


science, which remind him that he himself is literally no better than the sin- 
ner whom he is to punish. Here I have translated into conscious terms what 
was bound to remain unconscious in Hamlet’s mind; and if anyone is in- 
clined to call him a hysteric, I can only accept the fact as one that is implied 
by my interpretation. The distaste for sexuality expressed by Hamlet in his 
conversation with Ophelia fits in very well with this: the same distaste 
which was destined to take possession of the poet’s mind more and more 
during the years that followed, and which reached its extreme expression in 
Timon of Athens. For it can of course only be the poet’s own mind which 
confronts us in Hamlet. I observe in a book on Shakespeare by Georg Bran- 
des (1896) a statement that Hamlet was written immediately after the death 
of Shakespeare’s father (in 1601), that is, under the immediate impact of his 
bereavement and, as we may well assume, while his childhood feelings about 
his father had been freshly revived. It is known, too, that Shakespeare’s own 
son who died at an early age bore the name of ‘Hamnet,’ which is identical 
with ‘Hamlet.’ Just as Hamlet deals with the relation of a son to his parents, 
so Macbeth (written at approximately the same period) is concerned with 
the subject of childlessness. But just as all neurotic symptoms, and, for that 
matter, dreams, are capable of being ‘over-interpreted’ and indeed need to 
be, if they are to be fully understood, so all genuinely creative writings are 
the product of more than a single motive and more than a single impulse in 
the poet’s mind, and are open to more than a single interpretation. In what 
I have written I have only attempted to interpret the deepest layer of im- 
pulses in the mind of the creative writer. 1 


1 [Footnote added 1919:] The above indications of a psycho-analytic explanation of 
Hamlet have since been amplified by Ernest Jones and defended against the alter- 
native views put forward in the literature of the subject. (See Jones, 1910<z [and, 
in a completer form, 1949 ].) — [Added 1930:] Incidentally, I have in the mean- 
time ceased to believe that the author of Shakespeare’s works was the man from 
Stratford. [See Freud, 1930c ] — [Added 1919:] Further attempts at an analysis of 
Macbeth will be found in a paper of mine [Freud, 191 Gd\ and in one by Jekels 
(1917). — [The first part of this footnote was included in a different form in the 
edition of 1911 but omitted from 1914 onwards: 'The views on the problem of 
Hamlet contained in the above passage have since been confirmed and supported 
with fresh arguments in an extensive study by Dr. Ernest Jones of Toronto 
(191 Ocz) . He has also pointed out the relation between the material in Hamlet and 
the myths of the birth of heroes discussed by Rank (1909).’ — Freud further dis- 
cussed Hamlet in a posthumously published sketch dealing with ‘Psychopathic 
Characters on the Stage’ (1942^), probably written in 1905 or 1906.] 




284 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


I cannot leave the subject of typical dreams of the death of loved rela- 
tives, without adding a few more words to throw light on their signifi- 
cance for the theory of dreams in general. In these dreams we find the 
highly unusual condition realized of a dream-thought formed by a re- 
pressed wish entirely eluding censorship and passing into the dream with- 
out modification. There must be special factors at work to make this 
event possible, and I believe that the occurrence of these dreams is facili- 
tated by two such factors. Firstly, there is no wish that seems more remote 
from us than this one: ‘we couldn’t even dream — so we believe — of wish- 
ing such a thing. For this reason the dream-censorship is not armed to 
meet such a monstrosity, just as Solon’s penal code contained no punish- 
ment for parricide. Secondly, in this case the repressed and unsuspected 
wish is particularly often met half-way by a residue from the previous day 
in the form of a worry about the safety of the person concerned. This 
worry can only make its way into the dream by availing itself of the cor- 
responding wish; while the wish can disguise itself behind the worry that 
has become active during the day. [Cf. pp. 594 fi] We may feel inclined 
to think that things are simpler than this and that one merely carries on 
during the night and in dreams with what one has been turning over in 
one’s mind during the day; but if so we shall be leaving dreams of the 
death of people of whom the dreamer is fond completely in the air and 
without any connection with our explanation of dreams in general, and 
we shall thus be clinging quite unnecessarily to a riddle which is perfectly 
capable of solution. 

It is also instructive to consider the relation of these dreams to anxiety- 
dreams. In the dreams we have been discussing, a repressed wish has found 
a means of evading censorship — and the distortion which censorship in- 
volves. The invariable concomitant is that painful feelings are experienced 
in the dream. In just the same way anxiety-dreams only occur if the cen- 
sorship has been wholly or partly overpowered; and, on the other hand, 
the overpowering of the censorship is facilitated if anxiety has already been 
produced as an immediate sensation arising from somatic sources. [Cf. 
above, pp. 255 ffi] We can thus plainly see the purpose for which the cen- 
sorship exercises its office and brings about the distortion of dreams: it 
does so in order to prevent the generation of anxiety or other forms of distress- 
ing affect. 

I have spoken above [p. 268] of the egoism of children’s minds, and I 
may now add, with a hint at a possible connection between the two facts, 



D. Typical Dreams 


285 


that dreams have the same characteristic. All of them are completely ego- 
istic : 1 2 the beloved ego appears in all of them, even though it may be 
disguised. The wishes that are fulfilled in them are invariably the ego’s 
wishes, and if a dream seems to have been provoked by an altruistic in- 
terest, we are only being deceived by appearances. Here are a few analyses 
of instances which seem to contradict this assertion. 


i 

A child of under four years old reported having dreamt that he had 
seen a big dish with a big joint of roast meat and vegetables on it. All at once 
the joint had been eaten up — whole and without being cut up. He had not 
seen the person who ate it . 1 

Who can the unknown person have been whose sumptuous banquet 
of meat was the subject of the little boy’s dream? His experiences during 
the dream-day must enlighten us on the subject. By doctor’s orders he 
had been put on a milk diet for the past few days. On the evening of the 
dream-day he had been naughty, and as a punishment he had been sent 
to bed without his supper. He had been through this hunger-cure once 
before and had been very brave about it. He knew he would get nothing, 
but would not allow himself to show by so much as a single word that he 
was hungry. Education had already begun to have an effect on him: it 
found expression in this dream, which exhibits the beginning of dream- 
distortion. There can be no doubt that the person whose wishes were 


1 [Cf. end of footnote below, pp. 288. See also pp. 338 £] 

2 [This dream, which was dreamt by Fliess’s son Robert, is mentioned in Freud’s let- 
ters to Fliess of August 8 and 20, 1899. (Freud, 1950a, Letters 1 14 and 1 16.)] — 
The appearance in dreams of things of great size and in great quantities and 
amounts, and of exaggeration generally, may be another childish characteristic. 
Children have no more ardent wish than to be big and grown-up and to get as 
much of things as grown-up people do. They are hard to satisfy, know no such 
word as ‘enough’ and insist insatiably on a repetition of things which they have en- 
joyed or whose taste they liked. It is only the civilizing influence of education that 
teaches them moderation and how to be content or resigned. Everyone knows that 
neurotics are equally inclined to be extravagant and immoderate. [Children’s love 
of repetition was alluded to by Freud towards the end of the sixth section of Chap- 
ter VII ofhis book on jokes (Freud, 1905c) and again discussed near the beginning 
of Chapter V of Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920 g).\ 




286 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


aimed at this lavish meal — a meat meal, too — was himself. But since he 
knew he was not allowed it, he did not venture to sit down to the meal 
himself, as hungry children do in dreams. (Cf. my little daughter Anna’s 
dream of strawberries on p. 163.) The person who ate the meal remained 
anonymous. 


n 

I dreamt one night that I saw in the window of a bookshop a new vol- 
ume in one of the series of monographs for connoisseurs which I am in 
the habit of buying — monographs on great artists, on world history, on 
famous cities, etc. The new series was called ‘Famous Speakers’ or ‘Speeches’ 
and its first volume bore the name ofiDr. Lecher. 

When I came to analyse this, it seemed to me improbable that I 
should be concerned in my dreams with the fame of Dr. Lecher, the non- 
stop speaker of the German Nationalist obstructionists in Parliament. 
The position was that a few days earlier I had taken on some new patients 
for psychological treatment, and was now obliged to talk for ten or eleven 
hours every day. So it was I myself who was a non-stop speaker. 


in 

Another time I had a dream that a man I knew on the staff of the Uni- 
versity said to me: ‘My son , the Myops.’ Then followed a dialogue made 
up of short remarks and rejoinders. After this, however, there was yet a 
third piece of dream in which I myself and my sons figured. So far as the 
dream’s latent content was concerned, Professor M. and his son were men 
of straw — a mere screen for me and my eldest son. I shall have to return 
to this dream later, on account of another of its features. [See pp. 449 ff. ] 


IV 

The dream which follows is an instance of really low egoistic feelings 
concealed behind affectionate worry. 

My friend Otto was looking ill. His face was broivn and he had protrud- 
ing eyes. 



D. Typical Dreams 


287 


Otto is my family doctor, and I owe him more than I can ever hope to 
repay: he has watched over my children’s health for many years, he has 
treated them successfully when they have been ill, and, in addition, when- 
ever circumstances have given him an excuse, he has given them presents. 
[See p. 140.] He had visited us on the dream-day, and my wife had re- 
marked that he looked tired and strained. That night I had my dream, 
which showed him with some of the signs of Basedow’s [Graves’] disease. 
Anyone who interprets this dream without regard for my rules will con- 
clude that I was worried about my friend’s health and that this worry was 
realized in the dream. This would not only contradict my assertion that 
dreams are wish-fulfilments, but my other assertion, too, that they are ac- 
cessible only to egoistic impulses. But I should be glad if anyone interpret- 
ing the dream in this way would be good enough to explain to me why my 
fears on Otto’s behalf should have lighted on Basedow’s disease — a diagno- 
sis for which his actual appearance gives not the slightest ground. My 
analysis, on the other hand, brought up the following material from an oc- 
currence six years earlier. A small group of us, which included Professor R., 
were driving in pitch darkness through the forest of N., which lay some 
hours’ drive from the place at which we were spending our summer holi- 
days. The coachman, who was not perfectly sober, spilt us, carriage and all, 
over an embankment, and it was only by a piece of luck that we all escaped 
injury. We were obliged, however, to spend the night in a neighbouring 
inn, at which the news of our accident brought us a lot of sympathy. A gen- 
tleman, with unmistakable signs of Basedow’s disease — incidentally, just as 
in the dream, only the brown discoloration of the skin of the face and the 
protruding eyes, but no goitre — placed himself entirely at our disposal and 
asked what he could do for us. Professor R. replied in his decisive manner: 
‘Nothing except to lend me a nightshirt.’ To which the fine gentleman re- 
joined: ‘I’m sorry, but I can’t do that,’ and left the room. 

As I continued my analysis, it occurred to me that Basedow was the 
name not only of a physician but also of a famous educationalist. (In my 
waking state I no longer felt quite so certain about this. 1 ) But my friend 
Otto was the person whom I had asked to watch over my children’s phys- 
ical education, especially at the age of puberty (hence the nightshirt), in 
case anything happened to me. By giving my friend Otto in the dream 
the symptoms of our noble helper, I was evidently saying that if anything 
happened to me he would do just as little for the children as Baron L. had 

1 [Though in fact it was correct. He was an eighteenth-century follower of Rousseau.] 



288 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


done on that occasion in spite of his kind offers of assistance. This seems 
to be sufficient evidence of the egoistic lining of the dream . 1 

But where was its wish-fulfilment to be found? Not in my avenging my- 
self on my friend Otto, whose fate it seems to be to be ill-treated in my 
dreams 2 ; but in the following consideration. At the same time as I repre- 
sented Otto in the dream as Baron L., I had identified myself with some- 
one else, namely Professor R.; for just as in the anecdote R. had made a 
request to Baron L., so I had made a request to Otto. And that is the point. 
Professor R., with whom I should really not venture to compare myself in 
the ordinary way, resembled me in having followed an independent path 
outside the academic world and had only achieved his well-merited title 
late in life. So once again I was wanting to be a Professor! Indeed the words 
‘late in life’ were themselves a wish-fulfilment; for they implied that I 
should live long enough to see my boys through the age of puberty myself . 3 


( y ) Other Typical Dreams 

I have no experience of my own of other kinds of typical dreams, in 
which the dreamer finds himself flying through the air to the accompani- 
ment of agreeable feelings or falling with feelings of anxiety; and whatever 


1 [Footnote added 1911:] When Ernest Jones was giving a scientific lecture on the 
egoism of dreams before an American audience, a learned lady objected to this 
unscientific generalization, saying that the author of the present work could only 
judge of the dreams of Austrians and had no business to speak of the dreams of 
Americans. So far as she was concerned, she was certain that all her dreams were 
strictly altruistic . — [ Added 1 925:] By way of excuse for this patriotic lady, I may 
remark that the statement that dreams are entirely egoistic [p. 284 fi] must not 
be misunderstood. Since anything whatever that occurs in preconscious thought 
can pass into a dream (whether into its actual content or into the latent dream- 
thoughts) that possibility is equally open to altruistic impulses. In the same way, 
an affectionate or erotic impulse towards someone else, if it is present in the un- 
conscious, can appear in a dream. The truth in the assertion made in the text 
above is thus restricted to the fact that among the unconscious instigators of a 
dream we very frequently find egoistic impulses which seem to have been over- 
come in waking life. 

2 [Cf. the dream of Irma’s injection in Chapter II (pp. 131 ff.).] 

3 [This dream is further discussed on pp. 556 and 560.] 




D. Typical Dreams 


289 


I have to say on the subject is derived from psycho-analyses . 1 The infor- 
mation provided by the latter forces me to conclude that these dreams, 
too, reproduce impressions of childhood; they relate, that is, to games in- 
volving movement, which are extraordinarily attractive to children. There 
cannot be a single uncle who has not shown a child how to fly by rushing 
across the room with him in his outstretched arms, or who has not played 
at letting him fall by riding him on his knee and then suddenly stretching 
out his leg, or by holding him up high and then suddenly pretending to 
drop him. Children are delighted by such experiences and never tire of 
asking to have them repeated, especially if there is something about them 
that causes a little fright or giddiness. In after years they repeat these expe- 
riences in dreams; but in the dreams they leave out the hands which held 
them up, so that they float, or fall unsupported. The delight taken by 
young children in games of this kind (as well as in swings and see-saws) is 
well known; and when they come to see acrobatic feats in a circus their 
memory of such games is revived . 2 Hysterical attacks in boys sometimes 
consist merely in reproductions of feats of this kind, carried out with great 
skill. It not uncommonly happens that these games of movement, though 
innocent in themselves, give rise to sexual feelings . 3 Childish ‘romping’ 


1 [The first sentence of this paragraph appeared in the original edition (1900) but 
was thereafter dropped until 1925. The remainder of the paragraph, together 
with the next one, were added in 1909, and in 1914 transferred to Chapter VI, 
Section E (where they will also be found, on p. 404 below). In the 1930 edition 
they were included in both places.] 

2 [Footnote added 1925:] Analytic research has shown us that in addition to pleasure 
derived from the organs concerned, there is another factor which contributes to 
the delight taken by children in acrobatic performances and to their repetition in 
hysterical attacks. This other factor is a memory-image, often unconscious, of an 
observation of sexual intercourse, whether between human beings or animals. 

3 A young medical colleague, who is quite free from any kind of nervous trouble, 
has given me the following information on this point: ‘I know from my own ex- 
perience that in my childhood I had a peculiar sensation in my genitals when I 
was on a swing and especially when the downward motion reached its greatest 
momentum. And though I cannot say I really enjoyed this sensation I must de- 
scribe it as a pleasurable one.’ — Patients have often told me that the first pleas- 
urable erections that they can remember occurred in their boyhood while they 
were climbing about. — Psycho-analysis makes it perfectly certain that the first 
sexual impulses frequently have their roots in games involving romping and 
wrestling played during childhood. [This topic was elaborated by Freud in the 
last section of the second of his Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905 d).] 




290 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


[‘Hetzen ] , if I may use a word which commonly describes all such activi- 
ties, is what is being repeated in dreams of flying, falling, giddiness and so 
on; while the pleasurable feelings attached to these experiences are trans- 
formed into anxiety. But often enough, as every mother knows, romping 
among children actually ends in squabbling and tears. 

Thus I have good grounds for rejecting the theory that what provokes 
dreams of flying and falling is the state of our tactile feelings during sleep 
or sensations of the movement of our lungs, and so on. [Cf. pp. 69 fl] In 
my view these sensations are themselves reproduced as part of the mem- 
ory to which the dream goes back: that is to say, they are part of the con- 
tent of the dream and not its source. 

I cannot, however, disguise from myself that I am unable to produce 
any complete explanation of this class of typical dreams. 1 My material has 
left me in the lurch precisely at this point. I must, however, insist upon the 
general assertion that all the tactile and motor sensations which occur in 
these typical dreams are called up immediately there is any psychical reason 
for making use of them and that they can be disregarded when no such 
need for them arises. [Cf. p. 257.] I am also of the opinion that the relation 
of these dreams to infantile experiences has been established with certainty 
from the indications I have found in the analyses of psychoneurotics. I am 
not able to say, however, what other meanings may become attached to the 
recollection of such sensations in the course of later life — different mean- 
ings, perhaps, in every individual case, in spite of the typical appearance of 
the dreams; and I should be glad to be able to fill up the gap by a careful 
analysis of clear instances. If anyone feels surprised that, in spite of the fre- 
quency precisely of dreams of flying, falling and pulling out teeth, etc., I 
should be complaining of lack of material on this particular topic, I must 
explain that I myself have not experienced any dreams of the kind since I 
turned my attention to the subject of dream-interpretation. The dreams of 
neurotics, moreover, of which I might otherwise avail myself, cannot al- 
ways be interpreted — not, at least, in many cases, so as to reveal the whole 
of their concealed meaning; a particular psychical force, which was con- 
cerned with the original constructing of the neurosis and is brought into 
operation once again when attempts are made at resolving it, prevents us 
from interpreting such dreams down to their last secret. 


1 [In the original edition (1900) the following paragraph (the first on examination 
dreams) preceded this one, and the present paragraph concluded the chapter. 
Thereafter this paragraph was altogether omitted until 1925.] 




D. Typical Dreams 


291 


(8) Examination Dreams 

Everyone who has passed the Matriculation examination at the end of his 
school studies complains of the obstinacy with which he is pursued by 
anxiety-dreams of having failed, or of being obliged to take the examina- 
tion again, etc. In the case of those who have obtained a University degree 
this typical dream is replaced by another one which represents them as 
having failed in their University Finals; and it is in vain that they object, 
even while they are still asleep, that for years they have been practising 
medicine or working as University lecturers or heads of offices. The in- 
eradicable memories of the punishments that we suffered for our evil 
deeds in childhood become active within us once more and attach them- 
selves to the two crucial points in our studies — the ‘dies irae, dies ilia of 
our stiffest examinations. The ‘examination anxiety’ of neurotics owes its 
intensification to these same childhood fears. After we have ceased to be 
school-children, our punishments are no longer inflicted on us by our 
parents or by those who brought us up or later by our schoolmasters. The 
relentless causal chains of real life take charge of our further education, 
and now we dream of Matriculation or Finals (and who has not trembled 
on those occasions, even if he was well-prepared for the examination?) 
whenever, having done something wrong or failed to do something prop- 
erly, we expect to be punished by the event — whenever, in short, we feel 
the burden of responsibility. 

For a further explanation of examination dreams 1 I have to thank an 
experienced colleague [Stekel] , who once declared at a scientific meeting 
that so far as he knew dreams of Matriculation only occur in people who 
have successfully passed it and never in people who have failed in it. It 
would seem, then, that anxious examination dreams (which, as has been 
confirmed over and over again, appear when the dreamer has some re- 
sponsible activity ahead of him next day and is afraid there may be a fi- 
asco) search for some occasion in the past in which great anxiety has 
turned out to be unjustified and has been contradicted by the event. This, 
then, would be a very striking instance of the content of a dream being 
misunderstood by the waking agency. [See pp. 262.] What is regarded as 


1 [This paragraph and the next one were added in 1909. In the editions of 1909 
and 1911 only, the words ‘the true explanation’ took the place of ‘a further 
explanation.’] 




292 


V. Material and Sources of Dreams 


an indignant protest against the dream: ‘But I’m a doctor, etc., already!’ 
would in reality be the consolation put forward by the dream, and would 
accordingly run: ‘Don’t be afraid of tomorrow! Just think how anxious 
you were before your Matriculation, and yet nothing happened to you. 
You’re a doctor, etc., already.’ And the anxiety which is attributed to the 
dream would really have arisen from the day’s residues. 

Such tests as I have been able to make of this explanation on myself 
and on other people, though they have not been sufficiently numerous, 
have confirmed its validity. For instance, I myself failed in Forensic Med- 
icine in my Finals; but I have never had to cope with this subject in 
dreams, whereas I have quite often been examined in Botany, Zoology or 
Chemistry. I went in for the examination in these subjects with well- 
founded anxiety; but, whether by the grace of destiny or of the examiners, 
I escaped punishment. In my dreams of school examinations, I am invari- 
ably examined in History, in which I did brilliantly — though only, it is 
true, because [in the oral examination] my kindly master (the one-eyed 
benefactor of another dream, see p. 50) did not fail to notice that on the 
paper of questions which I handed him back I had run my fingernail 
through the middle one of the three questions included, to warn him not 
to insist upon that particular one. One of my patients, who decided not 
to sit for his Matriculation the first time but passed it later, and who sub- 
sequently failed in his army examination and never got a commission, has 
told me that he often dreams of the former of these examinations but 
never of the latter. 1 

The interpretation of examination dreams is faced by the difficulty 
which I have already referred to as characteristic of the majority of typical 
dreams [p. 259]. 2 It is but rarely that the material with which the dreamer 


1 [At this point in the 1909 edition the following paragraph appeared: ‘The col- 
league whom I have mentioned above (Dr. Stekel) has drawn attention to the 
fact that the word we use for Matriculation, “ Matura ,” also means “maturity”; 
he claims to have observed that “Matura” dreams very often appear when a sex- 
ual test lies ahead for the next day, when, that is, the fiasco that is dreaded may 
lie in an insufficient release of potency.’ In the 1911 edition the following sen- 
tence was added: ‘A German colleague has, as I think rightly objected to this 
that the name of this examination in Germany — “Abiturium ” — does not bear 
this double meaning.’ This whole paragraph was omitted from 1914 onwards. 
In 1925 it was replaced by the new final paragraph of the chapter. The subject 
was discussed by Stekel himself in 1909, 464 and 471.] 

1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.] 




D. Typical Dreams 


293 


provides us in associations is sufficient to interpret the dream. It is only by 
collecting a considerable number of examples of such dreams that we can 
arrive at a better understanding of them. Not long ago I came to the con- 
clusion that the objection ‘You’re a doctor, etc., already’ does not merely 
conceal a consolation but also signifies a reproach. This would have run: 
‘You’re quite old now, quite far advanced in life, and yet you go on doing 
these stupid, childish things.’ This mixture of self-criticism and consola- 
tion would thus correspond to the latent content of examination dreams. 
If so, it would not be surprising if the self-reproaches for being ‘stupid’ and 
‘childish’ in these last examples referred to the repetition of reprehensible 
sexual acts. 

Wilhelm Stekel , 1 who put forward the first interpretation of dreams of 
Matriculation [‘Matura], was of the opinion that they regularly related 
to sexual tests and sexual maturity. My experience has often confirmed his 
view . 2 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1925.] 

2 [In the 1909 and 1911 editions this chapter was continued with a discussion of 
other kinds of ‘typical’ dreams. But from 1914 onwards this further discussion was 
transferred to Chapter VI, Section E, after the newly introduced material dealing 
with dream-symbolism. See p. 394 f. below. (Cf. Editor’s Introduction, p. xiii.)] 





CHAPTER VI 


THE DREAM-WORK 1 


Every attempt that has hitherto been made to solve the problem of 
dreams has dealt directly with their manifest content as it is presented in 
our memory. All such attempts have endeavoured to arrive at an interpre- 
tation of dreams from their manifest content or (if no interpretation was 
attempted) to form a judgement as to their nature on the basis of that 
same manifest content. We are alone in taking something else into ac- 
count. We have introduced a new class of psychical material between the 
manifest content of dreams and the conclusions of our enquiry: namely, 
their latent content, or (as we say) the ‘dream-thoughts,’ arrived at by 
means of our procedure. It is from these dream-thoughts and not from a 
dream’s manifest content that we disentangle its meaning. We are thus 
presented with a new task which had no previous existence: the task, that 
is, of investigating the relations between the manifest content of dreams 
and the latent dream-thoughts, and of tracing out the processes by which 
the latter have been changed into the former. 

The dream-thoughts and the dream-content are presented to us like two 
versions of the same subject-matter in two different languages. Or, more 
properly, the dream-content seems like a transcript of the dream-thoughts 
into another mode of expression, whose characters and syntactic laws it is 
our business to discover by comparing the original and the translation. The 


1 [Lecture XI of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916-17) deals with the dream- 
work on a much less extensive scale.] 


295 



296 


VI. The Dream-Work 


dream-thoughts are immediately comprehensible, as soon as we have learnt 
them. The dream-content, on the other hand, is expressed as it were in a 
pictographic script, the characters of which have to be transposed individ- 
ually into the language of the dream-thoughts. If we attempted to read 
these characters according to their pictorial value instead of according to 
their symbolic relation, we should clearly be led into error. Suppose I have 
a picture-puzzle, a rebus, in front of me. It depicts a house with a boat on 
its roof, a single letter of the alphabet, the figure of a running man whose 
head has been conjured away, and so on. Now I might be misled into rais- 
ing objections and declaring that the picture as a whole and its component 
parts are nonsensical. A boat has no business to be on the roof of a house, 
and a headless man cannot run. Moreover, the man is bigger than the 
house; and if the whole picture is intended to represent a landscape, letters 
of the alphabet are out of place in it since such objects do not occur in na- 
ture. But obviously we can only form a proper judgement of the rebus if 
we put aside criticisms such as these of the whole composition and its parts 
and if, instead, we try to replace each separate element by a syllable or word 
that can be represented by that element in some way or other. The words 
which are put together in this way are no longer nonsensical but may form 
a poetical phrase of the greatest beauty and significance. A dream is a 
picture-puzzle of this sort and our predecessors in the field of dream- 
interpretation have made the mistake of treating the rebus as a pictorial 
composition: and as such it has seemed to them nonsensical and worthless. 


(A) 

THE WORK OF CONDENSATION 

The first thing that becomes clear to anyone who compares the dream- 
content with the dream-thoughts is that a work of condensation on a large 
scale has been carried out. Dreams are brief, meagre and laconic in com- 
parison with the range and wealth of the dream-thoughts. If a dream is 
written out it may perhaps fill half a page. The analysis setting out the 
dream-thoughts underlying it may occupy six, eight or a dozen times as 
much space. This relation varies with different dreams; but so far as my 
experience goes its direction never varies. As a rule one underestimates the 
amount of compression that has taken place, since one is inclined to re- 



A. The Work of Condensation 


297 


gard the dream-thoughts that have been brought to light as the complete 
material, whereas if the work of interpretation is carried further it may re- 
veal still more thoughts concealed behind the dream I have already had 
occasion to point out [cf. pp. 252 £] that it is in fact never possible to be 
sure that a dream has been completely interpreted. 1 Even if the solution 
seems satisfactory and without gaps, the possibility always remains that 
the dream may have yet another meaning. Strictly speaking, then, it is 
impossible to determine the amount of condensation. 

There is an answer, which at first sight seems most plausible, to the ar- 
gument that the great lack of proportion between the dream-content and 
the dream-thoughts implies that the psychical material has undergone an 
extensive process of condensation in the course of the formation of the 
dream. We very often have an impression that we have dreamt a great deal 
all through the night and have since forgotten most of what we dreamt. 
On this view, the dream which we remember when we wake up would 
only be a fragmentary remnant of the total dream-work; and this, if we 
could recollect it in its entirety, might well be as extensive as the dream- 
thoughts. There is undoubtedly some truth in this: there can be no ques- 
tion that dreams can be reproduced most accurately if we try to recall 
them as soon as we wake up and that our memory of them becomes more 
and more incomplete towards evening. But on the other hand it can be 
shown that the impression that we have dreamt a great deal more than we 
can reproduce is very often based on an illusion, the origin of which I 
shall discuss later. [Cf. pp. 494 and 520.] Moreover the hypothesis that 
condensation occurs during the dream-work is not affected by the possi- 
bility of dreams being forgotten, since this hypothesis is proved to be cor- 
rect by the quantities of ideas which are related to each individual piece 
of the dream which has been retained. Even supposing that a large piece 
of the dream has escaped recollection, this may merely have prevented 
our having access to another group of dream-thoughts. There is no justi- 
fication for supposing that the lost pieces of the dream would have related 
to the same thoughts which we have already reached from the pieces of 
the dream that have survived. 2 


1 [This subject is discussed at length in Freud, 19254 Section A.] 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] The occurrence of condensation in dreams has been 
hinted at by many writers. Du Prel (1885, 85) has a passage in which he says it 
is absolutely certain that there has been a process of condensation of the groups 
of ideas in dreams. 




298 


VI. The Dream-Work 


In view of the very great number of associations produced in analysis 
to each individual element of the content of a dream, some readers may be 
led to doubt whether, as a matter of principle, we are justified in regarding 
as part of the dream-thoughts all the associations that occur to us during 
the subsequent analysis — whether we are justified, that is, in supposing 
that all these thoughts were already active during the state of sleep and 
played a part in the formation of the dream. Is it not more probable that 
new trains of thought have arisen in the course of the analysis which had 
no share in forming the dream? I can only give limited assent to this argu- 
ment. It is no doubt true that some trains of thought arise for the first time 
during the analysis. But one can convince oneself in all such cases that 
these new connections are only set up between thoughts which were al- 
ready linked in some other way in the dream-thoughts. 1 The new connec- 
tions are, as it were, loop-lines or short-circuits, made possible by the 
existence of other and deeper-lying connecting paths. It must be allowed 
that the great bulk of the thoughts which are revealed in analysis were al- 
ready active during the process of forming the dream; for, after working 
through a string of thoughts which seem to have no connection with the 
formation of a dream, one suddenly comes upon one which is represented 
in its content and is indispensable for its interpretation, but which could 
not have been reached except by this particular line of approach. 1 may 
here recall the dream of the botanical monograph [pp. 193 ft], which 
strikes one as the product of an astonishing amount of condensation, even 
though I have not reported its analysis in full. 

How, then, are we to picture psychical conditions during the period of 
sleep which precedes dreams? Are all the dream-thoughts present along- 
side one another? or do they occur in sequence? or do a number of trains 
of thoughts start out simultaneously from different centres and afterwards 
unite? There is no need for the present, in my opinion, to form any plas- 
tic idea of psychical conditions during the formation of dreams. It must 
not be forgotten, however, that we are dealing with an unconscious process 
of thought, which may easily be different from what we perceive during 
purposive reflection accompanied by consciousness. 


1 [This question is mentioned again on pp. 326 f. and discussed at very much 
greater length in the last part of Section A of Chapter VII (pp. 529 fi). See espe- 
cially pp. 534 £] 




A. The Work of Condensation 


299 


The unquestionable fact remains, however, that the formation of 
dreams is based on a process of condensation. How is that condensation 
brought about? 

When we reflect that only a small minority of all the dream-thoughts re- 
vealed are represented in the dream by one of their ideational elements, we 
might conclude that condensation is brought about by omission: that is, that 
the dream is not a faithful translation or a point-for-point projection of the 
dream-thoughts, but a highly incomplete and fragmentary version of them. 
This view, as we shall soon discover, is a most inadequate one. But we may 
take it as a provisional starting-point and go on to a further question. If only 
a few elements from the dream-thoughts find their way into the dream-con- 
tent, what are the conditions which determine their selection? 

In order to get some light on this question we must turn our attention 
to those elements of the dream-content which must have fulfilled these 
conditions. And the most favourable material for such an investigation 
will be a dream to the construction of which a particularly intense process 
of condensation has contributed. I shall accordingly begin by choosing 
for the purpose the dream which I have already recorded on pp. 193 ff. 


i 

The Dream of the Botanical Monograph 

Content of the Dream. — I had ivritten a monograph on an (unspec- 
ified) genus of plants. The book lay before me and I was at the moment turn- 
ing over a folded coloured plate. Bound up in the copy there was a dried 
specimen of the plant. 

The element in this dream which stood out most was the botanical 
monograph. This arose from the impressions of the dream-day: I had in 
fact seen a monograph on the genus Cyclamen in the window of a book- 
shop. There was no mention of this genus in the content of the dream; all 
that was left in it was the monograph and its relation to botany. The 
‘botanical monograph’ immediately revealed its connection with the work 
upon cocaine which I had once written. From ‘cocaine’ the chains of 
thought led on the one hand to the Festschrifi and to certain events in a 
University laboratory, and on the other hand to my friend Dr. Konigstein, 



300 


VI. The Dream-Work 


the eye surgeon, who had had a share in the introduction of cocaine. The 
figure of Dr. Konigstein further reminded me of the interrupted conversa- 
tion which I had had with him the evening before and of my various re- 
flections upon the payment for medical services among colleagues. This 
conversation was the actual currently active instigator of the dream; the 
monograph on the Cyclamen was also a currently active impression, but 
one of an indifferent nature. As I perceived, the ‘botanical monograph’ in 
the dream turned out to be an ‘intermediate common entity’ between the 
two experiences of the previous day; it was taken over unaltered from the 
indifferent impression and was linked with the psychically significant 
event by copious associative connections. 

Not only the compound idea, ‘botanical monograph,’ however, but 
each of its components, ‘botanical’ and ‘monograph’ separately, led by nu- 
merous connecting paths deeper and deeper into the tangle of dream- 
thoughts. ‘Botanical’ was related to the figure of Professor Gartner 
[Gardener], the blooming looks of his wife, to my patient Flora and to the 
lady [Frau L.] of whom I had told the story of the forgotten flowers. Gart- 
ner led in turn to the laboratory and to my conversation with Konigstein. 
My two patients [Flora and Frau L.] had been mentioned in the course of 
this conversation. A train of thought joined the lady with the flowers to 
my wife’s favourite flowers and thence to the title of the monograph which 
I had seen for a moment during the day. In addition to these, ‘botanical’ 
recalled an episode at my secondary school and an examination while I 
was at the University. A fresh topic touched upon in my conversation with 
Dr. Konigstein — my favourite hobbies — was joined, through the interme- 
diate link of what I jokingly called my favourite flower, the artichoke, with 
the train of thought proceeding from the forgotten flowers. Behind ‘arti- 
chokes’ lay, on the one hand, my thoughts about Italy 1 and, on the other 
hand, a scene from my childhood which was the opening of what have 
since become my intimate relations with books. Thus ‘botanical’ was a 
regular nodal point in the dream. Numerous trains of thought converged 
upon it, which, as I can guarantee, had appropriately entered into the con- 
text of the conversation with Dr. Konigstein. Here we find ourselves in a 
factory of thoughts where, as in the ‘weaver’s masterpiece’ — 


1 [This seems to be a reference to an element in the dream-thoughts not previ- 
ously mentioned.] 




A. The Work of Condensation 


301 


Ein Tritt tausend Faden regt, 

Die Schifflein heriiber hiniiber schiessen, 

Die Faden ungesehen fliessen, 

Ein Schlag tausend Verbindungen schlagt. 1 

So, too, ‘monograph’ in the dream touches upon two subjects: the one- 
sidedness of my studies and the costliness of my favourite hobbies. 

This first investigation leads us to conclude that the elements ‘botanical’ 
and ‘monograph’ found their way into the content of the dream because 
they possessed copious contacts with the majority of the dream-thoughts, 
because, that is to say, they constituted ‘nodal points’ upon which a great 
number of the dream-thoughts converged, and because they had several 
meanings in connection with the interpretation of the dream. The expla- 
nation of this fundamental fact can also be put in another way: each of the 
elements of the dream’s content turns out to have been ‘overdetermined’ — 
to have been represented in the dream-thoughts many times over. 

We discover still more when we come to examine the remaining con- 
stituents of the dream in relation to their appearance in the dream- 
thoughts. The coloured plate which I was unfolding led (see the analysis, 
pp. 195 f.) to a new topic, my colleagues’ criticisms of my activities, and 
to one which was already represented in the dream, my favourite hobbies; 
and it led, in addition, to the childhood memory in which I was pulling 
to pieces a book with coloured plates. The dried specimen of the plant 
touched upon the episode of the herbarium at my secondary school and 
specially stressed that memory. 

The nature of the relation between dream-content and dream-thoughts 
thus becomes visible. Not only are the elements of a dream determined by 
the dream-thoughts many times over, but the individual dream-thoughts are 
represented in the dream by several elements. Associative paths lead from 
one element of the dream to several dream-thoughts, and from one dream- 
thought to several elements of the dream. Thus a dream is not constructed 


1 [. . . a thousand threads one treadle throws, 

Where fly the shuttles hither and thither, 

Unseen the threads are knit together, 

And an infinite combination grows. 

Goethe, Faust, Part I [Scene 4] 
(Bayard Taylor’s translation).] 




302 


VI. The Dream-Work 


by each individual dream-thought, or group of dream-thoughts, finding (in 
abbreviated form) separate representation in the content of the dream — in 
the kind of way in which an electorate chooses parliamentary representatives; 
a dream is constructed, rather, by the whole mass of dream-thoughts being 
submitted to a sort of manipulative process in which those elements which 
have the most numerous and strongest supports acquire the right of entry 
into the dream-content — in a manner analogous to election by scrutin de 
liste. In the case of every dream which I have submitted to an analysis of this 
kind I have invariably found these same fundamental principles confirmed: 
the elements of the dream are constructed out of the whole mass of dream- 
thoughts and each one of those elements is shown to have been determined 
many times over in relation to the dream-thoughts. 

It will certainly not be out of place to illustrate the connection be- 
tween dream-content and dream-thoughts by a further example, which is 
distinguished by the specially ingenious interweaving of their reciprocal 
relations. It is a dream produced by one of my patients — a man whom I 
was treating for claustrophobia. It will soon become clear why I have cho- 
sen to give this exceptionally clever dream-production the title of 


ii 

‘A Lovely Dream’ 

He was driving with a large party to X Street, in which there was an unpre- 
tentious inn. (This is not the case.) There was a play being acted inside it. 
At one moment he was audience, at another actor. When it was over, they had 
to change their clothes so as to get back to town. Some of the company ivere 
shown into rooms on the ground floor and others into rooms on the first floor. 
Then a dispute broke out. The ones up above ivere angry because the ones 
down beloiv were not ready, and they coidd not come downstairs. His brother 
was up above and he was down below and he was angry ivith his brother be- 
cause they were so much pressed. (This part was obscure.) Moreover, it had 
been decided and arranged even ivhen they first arrived ivho was to be up 
above and who was to be down beloiv. Then he was walking by himself up 
the rise made by X Street in the direction of town. He walked with such diffi- 
culty and so laboriously that he seemed glued to the spot. An elderly gentleman 



A. The Work of Condensation 


303 


came up to him and began abusing the King of Italy. At the top of the rise he 
was able to ivalk much more easily. 

His difficulty in walking up the rise was so distinct that after waking 
up he was for some time in doubt whether it was a dream or reality. 

We should not think very highly of this dream, judging by its manifest 
content. In defiance of the rules, I shall begin its interpretation with the 
portion which the dreamer described as being the most distinct. 

The difficulty which he dreamt of and probably actually experienced 
during the dream — the laborious climbing up the rise accompanied by 
dyspnoea — was one of the symptoms which the patient had in fact exhib- 
ited years before and which had at that time been attributed, along with 
certain other symptoms, to tuberculosis. (The probability is that this was 
hysterically simulated.) The peculiar sensation of inhibited movement 
that occurs in this dream is already familiar to us from dreams of exhibit- 
ing [see pp. 261 ffi] and we see once more that it is material available at 
any time for any other representational purpose. [Cf. p. 350 fi] The piece 
of the dream-content which described how the climb began by being dif- 
ficult and became easy at the end of the rise reminded me, when I heard 
it, of the masterly introduction to Alphonse Daudet’s Sappho. That well- 
known passage describes how a young man carries his mistress upstairs in 
his arms; at first she is as light as a feather, but the higher he climbs the 
heavier grows her weight. The whole scene foreshadows the course of 
their love-affair, which was intended by Daudet as a warning to young 
men not to allow their affections to be seriously engaged by girls of hum- 
ble origin and a dubious past. 1 Though I knew that my patient had been 
involved in a love-affair which he had recently broken off with a lady on 
the stage, I did not expect to find my guess at an interpretation justified. 
Moreover the situation in Sappho was the reverse of what it had been in 
the dream. In the dream the climbing had been difficult to begin with 
and had afterwards become easy; whereas the symbolism in the novel only 
made sense if something that had been begun lightly ended by becoming 
a heavy burden. But to my astonishment my patient replied that my in- 
terpretation fitted in very well with a piece he had seen at the theatre the 
evening before. It was called Rund um Wien [ Round Vienna \ and gave a 


1 [ Footnote added 1911:] What I have written below in the section on symbolism 
about the significance of dreams of climbing [p. 368 n. 2] throws light upon the 
imagery chosen by the novelist. 




304 


VI. The Dream-Work 


picture of the career of a girl who began by being respectable, who then 
became a demi-mondaine and had liaisons with men in high positions and 
so ‘went up in the world," but who ended by ‘ coming down in the world." 
The piece had moreover reminded him of another, which he had seen 
some years earlier, called Von Stufe zu Stufe [Step by Step ] , and which had 
been advertised by a poster showing a staircase with a flight of steps. 

To continue with the interpretation. The actress with whom he had 
had this latest, eventful liaison had lived in X Street. There is nothing in 
the nature of an inn in that street. But when he was spending part of 
the summer in Vienna on the lady’s account he had put up [German 
‘ abgestiegen," literally ‘ stepped down" ] at a small hotel in the neighbour- 
hood. When he left the hotel he had said to his cab-driver: ‘Anyhow I’m 
lucky not to have picked up any vermin.’ (This, incidentally, was another 
of his phobias.) To this the driver had replied: ‘How could anyone put up 
at such a place! It’s not a hotel, it’s only an inn." 

The idea of an inn at once recalled a quotation to his mind: 

Bei einem Wirte wundermild. 

Da war ich jiingst zu Gaste . 1 

The host in Uhland’s poem was an apple-tree-, and a second quotation 
now carried on his train of thought: 

Faust {mit der Jungen tanzend ): 

Einst hatt’ ich einen schonen Traum; 

Da sah ich einen Apfelbaum, 

Zwei schone Apfel glanzten dran, 

Sie reizten mich, ich stieg hinan. 

Die Shone: 

Der Apfelchen begehrt ihr sehr, 

Und schon vom Paradiese her. 

Von Freuden fiihl’ ich mich bewegt, 

Dass auch mein Garten solche tragt . 2 


1 [Literally: ‘I was lately a guest at an inn with a most gentle host’. 
(Uhland, Wanderlieder, 8, ‘Einkehr.’)] 

2 [FAUST ( dancing with the Young Witch ) : 

A lovely dream once came to me, 

And I beheld an apple-tree. 




A. The Work of Condensation 


305 


There cannot be the faintest doubt what the apple-tree and the apples 
stood for. Moreover, lovely breasts had been among the charms which 
had attracted the dreamer to his actress. 

The context of the analysis gave us every ground for supposing that 
the dream went back to an impression in childhood. If so, it must have 
referred to the wet-nurse of the dreamer, who was by then a man almost 
thirty years old. For an infant the breasts of his wet-nurse are nothing 
more nor less than an inn. The wet-nurse, as well as Daudet’s Sappho, 
seem to have been allusions to the mistress whom the patient had recently 
dropped. 

The patient’s (elder) brother also appeared in the content of the dream, 
the brother being up above and the patient himself doivn below. This was 
once again the reverse of the actual situation; for, as 1 knew, the brother 
had lost his social position while the patient had maintained his. In repeat- 
ing the content of the dream to me, the dreamer had avoided saying that 
his brother was up above and he himself ‘on the ground floor.’ That would 
have put the position too clearly, since here in Vienna if we say someone is 
'on the ground floor we mean that he has lost his money and his position — 
in other words, that he has ‘ come doivn in the ivorld .’ Now there must have 
been a reason for some of this part of the dream being represented by its 
reverse. Further, the reversal must hold good of some other relation be- 
tween dream-thoughts and dream-content as well [cf. below, pp. 34 1 £] ; 
and we have a hint of where to look for this reversal. It must evidently be 
at the end of the dream, where once again there was a reversal of the diffi- 
culty in going upstairs as described in Sappho. We can then easily see what 
reversal is intended. In Sappho the man carried a woman who was in a sex- 
ual relation to him; in the dream-thoughts the position was reversed, and a 
woman was carrying a man. And since this can only happen in childhood, 
the reference was once more to the wet-nurse bearing the weight of the 


On which two lovely apples shone; 

They charmed me so, I climbed thereon. 

The Lovely Witch: 

Apples have been desired by you, 

Since first in Paradise they grew; 

And I am moved with joy to know 
That such within my garden grow. 

Goethe, Faust, Part I [Scene 2 1 , Walpurgisnacht] 

(Bayard Taylor’s translation, slightly modified).] 




306 


VI. The Dream-Work 


infant in her arms. Thus the end of the dream made a simultaneous refer- 
ence to Sappho and to the wet-nurse. 

Just as the author of the novel, in choosing the name ‘Sappho,’ had in 
mind an allusion to Lesbian practices, so too the pieces of the dream that 
spoke of people ‘ up above and ‘ down below alluded to phantasies of a sex- 
ual nature which occupied the patient’s mind and, as suppressed desires, 
were not without a bearing on his neurosis. (The interpretation of the 
dream did not itself show us that what were thus represented in the 
dream were phantasies and not recollections of real events; an analysis 
only gives us the content of a thought and leaves it to us to determine its 
reality. Real and imaginary events appear in dreams at first sight as of 
equal validity; and that is so not only in dreams but in the production of 
more important psychical structures.) 1 

A ‘large party’ meant, as we already know [see pp. 263 £], a secret. His 
brother was simply the representative (introduced into the childhood 
scene by a ‘retrospective phantasy’) 2 of all his later rivals for a woman’s af- 
fection. The episode of the gentleman who abused the King of Italy re- 
lated once again, via the medium of a recent and in itself indifferent 
experience, to people of lower rank pushing their way into higher society. 
It was just as though the child at the breast was being given a warning 
parallel to the one which Daudet had given to young men. 3 

To provide a third opportunity for studying condensation in the for- 
mation of dreams, I will give part of the analysis of another dream, which 
I owe to an elderly lady undergoing psycho-analytic treatment. As was to 
be expected from the severe anxiety-states from which the patient suf- 
fered, her dreams contained a very large number of sexual thoughts, the 
first realization of which both surprised and alarmed her. Since I shall not 


1 [Freud is probably referring here to the discovery which he had recently made 
that the infantile sexual traumas apparently revealed in his analyses of neurotic 
patients were in fact very often phantasies. See Freud, 1906<7.] 

2 [Phantasies of this kind had been discussed by Freud previously, in the latter part 
of his paper on ‘Screen Memories’ (189 9a).] 

3 The imaginary nature of the situation relating to the dreamer’s wet-nurse was 
proved by the objectively established fact that in his case the wet-nurse had been 
his mother. I may recall in this connection the anecdote, which I repeated on 
p. 226, of the young man who regretted that he had not made better use of his 
opportunities with his wet-nurse. A regret of the same kind was no doubt the 
source of the present dream. 




A. The Work of Condensation 


307 


be able to pursue the interpretation of the dream to the end, its material 
will appear to fall into several groups without any visible connection. 


ill 

‘The May-Beetle 1 Dream’ 

Content of the Dream. — She called to mind that she had two may- 
beetles in a box and that she must set them free or they would suffocate. She 
opened the box and the may-beetles ivere in an exhausted state. One of them 
flew out of the open ivindow; but the other ivas crushed by the casement while 
she was shutting it at someone ’s request. ( Signs of disgust.) 

Analysis. — Her husband was temporarily away from home, and her 
fourteen-year-old daughter was sleeping in the bed beside her. The 
evening before, the girl had drawn her attention to a moth which had 
fallen into her tumbler of water; but she had not taken it out and felt 
sorry for the poor creature next morning. The book she had been reading 
during the evening had told how some boys had thrown a cat into boiling 
water, and had described the animal’s convulsions. These were the two 
precipitating causes of the dream — in themselves indifferent. She then 
pursued the subject of cruelty to animals further. Some years before, while 
they were spending the summer at a particular place, her daughter had 
been very cruel to animals. She was collecting butterflies and asked the 
patient for some arsenic to kill them with. On one occasion a moth with 
a pin through its body had gone on flying about the room for a long time; 
another time some caterpillars which the child was keeping to turn into 
chrysalises starved to death. At a still more tender age the same child used 
to tear the wings off beetles and butterflies. But today she would be horri- 
fied at all these cruel actions — she had grown so kind-hearted. 

The patient reflected over this contradiction. It reminded her of an- 
other contradiction, between appearance and character, as George Eliot 
displays it in Adam Bede-, one girl who was pretty, but vain and stupid, and 
another who was ugly, but of high character; a nobleman who seduced the 
silly girl, and a working man who felt and acted with true nobility. How 


1 [The commoner English equivalent for the German ‘Maikdfer is ‘cockchafer.’ 
For the purposes of this dream, however, a literal translation is to be preferred.] 



308 


VI. The Dream-Work 


impossible it was, she remarked, to recognize that sort of thing in people! 
Who would have guessed, to look at her, that she was tormented by sen- 
sual desires? 

In the same year in which the little girl had begun collecting butterflies, 
the district they were in had suffered from a serious plague of may-beetles. 
The children were furious with the beetles and crushed them unmercifully. 
At that time my patient had seen a man who tore the wings off may-beetles 
and then ate their bodies. She herself had been born in May and had been 
married in May. Three days after her marriage she had written to her par- 
ents at home saying how happy she was. But it had been far from true. 

The evening before the dream she had been rummaging among some 
old letters and had read some of them — some serious and some comic — 
aloud to her children. There had been a most amusing letter from a piano- 
teacher who had courted her when she was a girl, and another from an 
admirer of noble birth } 

She blamed herself because one of her daughters had got hold of a 
‘bad’ book by Maupassant . 2 The arsenic that the girl had asked for re- 
minded her of the arsenic pills which restored the Due de Mora’s youthful 
strength in [Daudet’s] Le Nabab. 

‘Set them free’ made her think of a passage in the Magic Flute-. 

Zur Liebe kann ich dich nicht zwingen, 

Doch geb ich dir die Freiheit nicht . 3 

‘May-beetles’ also made her think of Katchen’s words: 

Verliebt ja wie ein Kdfer bist du mir . 4 


1 This had been the true instigator of the dream. 

2 An interpolation is required at this point: ‘books of that kind are poison to a girl.’ 
The patient herself had dipped into forbidden books a great deal when she was 
young. 

3 [Fear not, to love I’ll ne’er compel thee; 

Yet ’tis too soon to set thee free. 

(Sarastro to Pamina in the Finale to Act I. — 

E. J. Dent’s translation.)] 

4 [‘You are madly in love with me.’ Literally: ‘You are in love with me like a beetle.’ 
From Kleist’s Kdtehen von Fleilbronn, IV, 2.] — A further train of thought led to 
the same poet’s Penthesilea, and to the idea of cruelty to a lover. 




A. The Work of Condensation 


309 


And in the middle of all this came a quotation from Tannhduser. 

Weil du von boser Lust beseelt . . 

She was living in a perpetual worry about her absent husband. Her 
fear that something might happen to him on his journey was expressed 
in numerous waking phantasies. A short time before, in the course of her 
analysis, she had lighted among her unconscious thoughts upon a com- 
plaint about her husband ‘growing senile.’ The wishful thought con- 
cealed by her present dream will perhaps best be conjectured if I mention 
that, some days before she dreamt it, she was horrified, in the middle of 
her daily affairs, by a phrase in the imperative mood which came into her 
head and was aimed at her husband: ‘Go and hang yourself!’ It turned 
out that a few hours earlier she had read somewhere or other that when a 
man is hanged he gets a powerful erection. The wish for an erection was 
what had emerged from repression in this horrifying disguise. ‘Go and 
hang yourself!’ was equivalent to: ‘Get yourself an erection at any price!’ 
Dr. Jenkins’s arsenic pills in Le Nabab fitted in here. But my patient was 
also aware that the most powerful aphrodisiac, cantharides (commonly 
known as ‘Spanish flies’), was prepared from crushed beetles. This was the 
drift of the principal part of the dream’s content. 

The opening and shutting of windoivs was one of the main subjects of 
dispute between her and her husband. She herself was aerophilic in her 
sleeping habits; her husband was aerophobic. Exhaustion was the chief 
symptom which she complained of at the time of the dream. 

In all three of the dreams which I have just recorded, I have indicated 
by italics the points at which one of the elements of the dream-content 
re-appears in the dream-thoughts, so as to show clearly the multiplicity 
of connections arising from the former. Since, however, the analysis of 
none of these dreams has been traced to its end, it will perhaps be worth 
while to consider a dream whose analysis has been recorded exhaustively, 
so as to show how its content is over-determined. For this purpose I will 
take the dream of Irma’s injection [pp. 131 ff.]. It will be easy to see from 


1 [Literally: ‘Because thou wast inspired by such evil pleasure .’ This is presumably 
a recollection of the opening phrase of the Pope’s condemnation reported by 
Tannhauser in the last scene of the opera. The actual words are: ‘Hast du so bose 
Lust getheilt’ — ‘Since thou hast shared such evil pleasure.’] 




310 


VI. The Dream-Work 


that example that the work of condensation makes use of more than one 
method in the construction of dreams. 

The principal figure in the dream-content was my patient Irma. She 
appeared with the features which were hers in real life, and thus, in the 
first instance, represented herself. But the position in which I examined 
her by the window was derived from someone else, the lady for whom, as 
the dream-thoughts showed, I wanted to exchange my patient. In so far 
as Irma appeared to have a diphtheritic membrane, which recalled my 
anxiety about my eldest daughter, she stood for that child and, behind 
her, through her possession of the same name as my daughter, was hidden 
the figure of my patient who succumbed to poisoning. In the further 
course of the dream the figure of Irma acquired still other meanings, 
without any alteration occurring in the visual picture of her in the dream. 
She turned into one of the children whom we had examined in the neu- 
rological department of the children’s hospital, where my two friends re- 
vealed their contrasting characters. The figure of my own child was 
evidently the stepping-stone towards this transition. The same ‘Irma’s’ re- 
calcitrance over opening her mouth brought an allusion to another lady 
whom I had once examined, and, through the same connection, to my 
wife. Moreover, the pathological changes which I discovered in her throat 
involved allusions to a whole series of other figures. 

None of these figures whom I lighted upon by following up ‘Irma’ ap- 
peared in the dream in bodily shape. They were concealed behind the 
dream figure of ‘Irma,’ which was thus turned into a collective image 
with, it must be admitted, a number of contradictory characteristics. Irma 
became the representative of all these other figures which had been sacri- 
ficed to the work of condensation, since 1 passed over to her, point by 
point, everything that reminded me of them. 

There is another way in which a ‘collective figure’ can be produced for 
purposes of dream-condensation, namely by uniting the actual features of 
two or more people into a single dream-image. It was in this way that the 
Dr. M. of my dream was constructed. He bore the name of Dr. M., he 
spoke and acted like him; but his physical characteristics and his malady 
belonged to someone else, namely to my eldest brother. One single fea- 
ture, his pale appearance, was doubly determined, since it was common 
to both of them in real life. 

Dr. R. in my dream about my uncle with the yellow beard [pp. 162 ff] 
was a similar composite figure. But in his case the dream-image was con- 
structed in yet another way. I did not combine the features of one person 



A. The Work of Condensation 


311 


with those of another and in the process omit from the memory-picture 
certain features of each of them. What I did was to adopt the procedure 
by means of which Gabon produced family portraits: namely by project- 
ing two images on to a single plate, so that certain features common to 
both are emphasized, while those which fail to fit in with one another can- 
cel one another out and are indistinct in the picture. In my dream about 
my uncle the fair beard emerged prominently from a face which belonged 
to two people and which was consequently blurred; incidentally, the beard 
further involved an allusion to my father and myself through the interme- 
diate idea of growing grey. 

The construction of collective and composite figures is one of the chief 
methods by which condensation operates in dreams. I shall presently have 
occasion to deal with them in another context. [See pp. 336 £] 

The occurrence of the idea of ‘dysentery’ in the dream of Irma’s injec- 
tion also had a multiple determination: first owing to its phonetic simi- 
larity to ‘diphtheria’ [see p. 138 £], and secondly owing to its connection 
with the patient whom I had sent to the East and whose hysteria was not 
recognized. 

Another interesting example of condensation in this dream was the 
mention in it of ‘propyls’ [pp. 140]. What was contained in the dream- 
thoughts was not ‘propyls’ but ‘amyls.’ It might be supposed that a single 
displacement had taken place at this point in the construction of the 
dream. This was indeed the case. But the displacement served the purposes 
of condensation, as it proved by the following addition to the analysis of 
the dream. When I allowed my attention to dwell for a moment longer on 
the word ‘propyls,’ it occurred to me that it sounded like ‘Propylaea.’ But 
there are Propylaea not only in Athens but in Munich. 1 A year before the 
dream I had gone to Munich to visit a friend who was seriously ill at the 
time — the same friend who was unmistakably alluded to in the dream by 
the word ‘trimethylamin’ which occurred immediately after ‘propyls.’ 

I shall pass over the striking way in which here, as elsewhere in dream- 
analyses, associations of the most various inherent importance are used 
for laying down thought-connections as though they were of equal 
weight, and shall yield to the temptation to give, as it were, a plastic pic- 
ture of the process by which the amyls in the dream-thoughts were re- 
placed by propyls in the dream-content. 


1 [A ceremonial portico on the model of the Athenian one.] 




312 


VI. The Dream-Work 


On the one hand we see the group of ideas attached to my friend 
Otto, who did not understand me, who sided against me, and who made 
me a present of liqueur with an aroma of amyl. On the other hand we 
see — linked to the former group by its very contrast — the group of ideas 
attached to my friend in Berlin [Wilhelm Fliess], who did understand me, 
who would take my side, and to whom I owed so much valuable infor- 
mation, dealing, amongst other things, with the chemistry of the sexual 
processes. 

The recent exciting causes — the actual instigators of the dream — deter- 
mined what was to attract my attention in the ‘Otto’ group; the amyl was 
among these selected elements, which were predestined to form part of the 
dream-content. The copious ‘Wilhelm’ group was stirred up precisely 
through being in contrast to ‘Otto,’ and those elements in it were em- 
phasized which echoed those which were already stirred up in ‘Otto.’ All 
through the dream, indeed, I kept on turning from someone who annoyed 
me to someone else who could be agreeably contrasted with him; point by 
point, I called up a friend against an opponent. Thus the amyl in the 
‘Otto’ group produced memories from the field of chemistry in the other 
group; in this manner the trimethylamin, which was supported from sev- 
eral directions, found its way into the dream-content. ‘Amyls’ itself might 
have entered the dream-content unmodified; but it came under the influ- 
ence of the ‘Wilhelm’ group. For the whole range of memories covered by 
that name was searched through in order to find some element which 
could provide a two-sided determination for ‘amyls.’ ‘Propyls’ was closely 
associated with ‘amyls,’ and Munich from the ‘Wilhelm’ group with its 
‘propylaea’ came halfway to meet it. The two groups of ideas converged in 
‘propyls-propylaea’; and, as though by an act of compromise, this inter- 
mediate element was what found its way into the dream-content. Here an 
intermediate common entity had been constructed which admitted of 
multiple determination. It is obvious, therefore, that multiple determina- 
tion must make it easier for an element to force its way into the dream- 
content. In order to construct an intermediate link of this kind, attention 
is without hesitation displaced from what is actually intended on to some 
neighbouring association. 

Our study of the dream of Irma’s injection has already enabled us to 
gain some insight into the processes of condensation during the forma- 
tion of dreams. We have been able to observe certain of their details, such 
as how preference is given to elements that occur several times over in the 



A. The Work of Condensation 


313 


dream-thoughts, how new unities are formed (in the shape of collective 
figures and composite structures), and how intermediate common entities 
are constructed. The further questions of the purpose of condensation and 
of the factors which tend to produce it will not be raised till we come to 
consider the whole question of the psychical processes at work in the for- 
mation of dreams. [See pp. 345 f. and Chapter VII, Section E, especially 
pp. 592 f£] We will be content for the present with recognizing the fact 
that dream-condensation is a notable characteristic of the relation be- 
tween dream-thoughts and dream-content. 

The work of condensation in dreams is seen at its clearest when it han- 
dles words and names. It is true in general that words are treated in dreams 
as though they were concrete things, and for that reason they are apt to 
be combined in just the same way as presentations of concrete things. 1 
Dreams of this sort offer the most amusing and curious neologisms. 2 


I 

On one occasion a medical colleague had sent me a paper he had writ- 
ten, in which the importance of a recent physiological discovery was, in 
my opinion, overestimated, and in which, above all, the subject was 
treated in too emotional a manner. The next night I dreamt a sentence 
which clearly referred to this paper: ‘Its written in a positively norekdal style.’ 
The analysis of the word caused me some difficulty at first. There could be 
no doubt that it was a parody of the [German] superlatives ‘ kolossal' and 
‘pyramidal'-, but its origin was not so easy to guess. At last I saw that the 
monstrosity was composed of the two names ‘Nora’ and ‘Ekdaf — 
characters in two well-known plays of Ibsen’s. [A Doll’s House and The 
Wild Duck.} Some time before, I had read a newspaper article on Ibsen by 
the same author whose latest work I was criticizing in the dream. 


1 [The relation between presentations of words and of things was discussed by 
Freud very much later, in the last pages of his paper on the Unconscious (191 5c).] 

2 [A dream involving a number of verbal conceits is reported by Freud in Chapter 
V (10) of his Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901 b ). — The examples which 
follow are, as will be seen, for the most part untranslatable. See Editor’s Intro- 
duction (p. xxi).] 




314 


VI. The Dream-Work 


ii 

One of my women patients told me a short dream which ended in a 
meaningless verbal compound. She dreamt she was with her husband at 
a peasant festivity and said: ‘ This will end in a general " Maistollmiitz.’ ” In 
the dream she had a vague feeling that it was some kind of pudding made 
with maize — a sort of polenta. Analysis divided the word into ‘Mais’ 
[‘maize’], doll' [‘mad’], ‘mannstoll’ [‘nymphomaniac’ — literally ‘mad for 
men’] and Olmiitz [a town in Moravia] . All these fragments were found 
to be remnants of a conversation she had had at table with her relatives. 
The following words lay behind ‘ Mais (in addition to a reference to the 
recently opened Jubilee Exhibition 1 ): ‘ Meissen (a Meissen [Dresden] 
porcelain figure representing a bird); ‘ Miss (her relatives’ English gov- 
erness had just gone to Olmiitz)-, and ‘mies (a Jewish slang term, used jok- 
ingly to mean ‘disgusting’). A long chain of thoughts and associations led 
off from each syllable of this verbal hotchpotch. 


hi 

A young man, whose door-bell had been rung late one night by an ac- 
quaintance who wanted to leave a visiting-card on him, had a dream that 
night: A man had been working till late in the evening to put his house- 
telephone in order. After he had gone, it kept on ringing — not continuously, 
but with detached rings. His servant fetched the man back, and the latter re- 
marked: ‘It’s a funny thing that even people ivho are “tutelrein” as a rule are 
quite unable to deal with a thing like this.’ 

It will be seen that the indifferent exciting cause of the dream only 
covers one element of it. That episode only obtained any importance 
from the fact that the dreamer put it in the same series as an earlier expe- 
rience which, though equally indifferent in itself, was given a substitutive 
meaning by his imagination. When he was a boy, living with his father, 
he had upset a glass of water over the floor while he was half-asleep. The 
flex of the house-telephone had been soaked through and its continuous 


1 [To commemorate the jubilee of the Emperor Francis Joseph, which was cele- 
brated in 1898.] 




A. The Work of Condensation 


315 


ringing had disturbed his father’s sleep. Since the continuous ringing cor- 
responded to getting wet, the ‘detached rings were used to represent drops 
falling. The word ‘ tutelrein could be analysed in three directions, and led 
in that way to three of the subjects represented in the dream-thoughts. 
‘ Tutel’ is a legal term for ‘guardianship’ [‘tutelage’] . ‘ Tutel (or possibly 
‘ Tatter) is also a vulgar term for a woman’s breast. The remaining portion 
of the word, ‘ rein [‘clean’], combined with the first part of ‘Zimmertele- 
graph ’ [‘house-telephone’], forms ‘ zimmerrein [‘house-trained’] — which 
is closely connected with making the floor wet, and, in addition, sounded 
very much like the name of a member of the dreamer’s family . 1 


IV 

In a confused dream of my own of some length, whose central point 
seemed to be a sea voyage, it appeared that the next stopping place was 
called ‘Hearsing and the next after that ‘ Fliessi This last word was the 


1 In waking life this same kind of analysis and synthesis of syllables — a syllabic 
chemistry, in fact — plays a part in a great number of jokes: ‘What is the cheapest 
way of obtaining silver? You go down an avenue of silver poplars [ Pappeln , which 
means both “poplars” and “babbling”] and call for silence. The babbling then 
ceases and the silver is released.’ The first reader and critic of this book — and his 
successors are likely to follow his example — protested that ‘the dreamer seems to 
be too ingenious and amusing.’ This is quite true so long as it refers only to the 
dreamer; it would only be an objection if it were to be extended to the dream- 
interpreter. In waking reality I have little claim to be regarded as a wit. If my 
dreams seem amusing, that is not on my account, but on account of the peculiar 
psychological conditions under which dreams are constructed; and the fact is in- 
timately connected with the theory of jokes and the comic. Dreams become in- 
genious and amusing because the direct and easiest pathway to the expression of 
their thoughts is barred: they are forced into being so. The reader can convince 
himself that my patients’ dreams seem at least as full of jokes and puns as my 
own, or even fuller. — [ Added 1909:] Nevertheless this objection led me to com- 
pare the technique of jokes with the dream-work; and the results are to be found 
in the book which I published on Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious 
(1905c). [In particular in Chapter VI. — Towards the end of this chapter Freud 
remarks that dream-jokes are bad jokes, and explains why this should be so. The 
same point is made in Lecture XV of the Introductory Lectures (1916-17.) — The 
‘first reader’ referred to above was Fliess, and the question is dealt with in a letter 
to him of September 11, 1899 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 118)]. 




316 


VI. The Dream-Work 


name of my friend in B[erlin], who has often been the goal of my travels. 
‘Hearsing’ was a compound. One part of it was derived from the names 
of places on the suburban railway near Vienna, which so often end in 
‘ing’: Hietzing, Liesing, Modling (Medelitz, ‘meae deliciae,' was its old 
name — that is ‘meine FreudV [‘my delight’]). The other part was derived 
from the English word ‘hearsay.’ This suggested slander and established 
the dream’s connection with its indifferent instigator of the previous day: 
a poem in the periodical Fliegende Blatter about a slanderous dwarf called 
‘Sagter Hatergesagt’ [‘He-says Says-he’]. If the syllable ‘ing’ were to be 
added to the name ‘Fliess’ we should get ‘Vlissingen,’ which was in fact 
the stopping-place on the sea voyage made by my brother whenever he 
visited us from England. But the English name for Vlissingen is ‘Flush- 
ing,’ which in English means ‘blushing’ and reminded me of the patients 
I have treated for ereutophobia, and also of a recent paper on that neuro- 
sis by Bechterew which had caused me some annoyance. 


v 

On another occasion I had a dream which consisted of two separate 
pieces. The first piece was the word ‘Autodidasker,’ which I recalled 
vividly. The second piece was an exact reproduction of a short and harm- 
less phantasy which I had produced some days before. This phantasy was 
to the effect that when I next saw Professor N. I must say to him: ‘The 
patient about whose condition I consulted you recently is in fact only suf- 
fering from a neurosis, just as you suspected.’ Thus the neologism ‘Auto- 
didasker’ must satisfy two conditions: firstly, it must bear or represent a 
composite meaning; and secondly, that meaning must be solidly related 
to the intention I had reproduced from waking life of making amends to 
Professor N. 

The word ‘Autodidasker’ could easily be analysed into ‘Autor’ [Au- 
thor], ‘Autodidakt’ [self-taught] and ‘Lasker,’ with which I also associated 
the name of Lassalle . 1 The first of these words led to the precipitating 


1 [Ferdinand Lassalle, founder of the German Social Democratic movement, was 
born at Breslau in 1825 and died in 1864. Eduard Lasker (1829-1884), born at 
Jarotschin, not far from Breslau, was one of the founders of the National Liberal 
Party in Germany. Both were of Jewish origin.] 




A. The Work of Condensation 


317 


cause of the dream — this time a significant one. I had given my wife sev- 
eral volumes by a well-known [Austrian] writer who was a friend of my 
brother’s, and who, as I have learnt, was a native of my own birth-place: 
J. J. David. One evening she had told me of the deep impression that had 
been made on her by the tragic story in one of David’s books of how a 
man of talent went to the bad; and our conversation had turned to a dis- 
cussion of the gifts of which we saw signs in our own children. Under the 
impact of what she had been reading, my wife expressed concern about the 
children, and I consoled her with the remark that those were the very dan- 
gers which could be kept at bay by a good up-bringing. My train of 
thought was carried further during the night; I took up my wife’s concern 
and wove all kinds of other things into it. A remark made by the author to 
my brother on the subject of marriage showed my thoughts a by-path 
along which they might come to be represented in the dream. This path 
led to Breslau, where a lady with whom we were very friendly had gone to 
be married and settle down. The concern I felt over the danger of coming 
to grief over a woman — for that was the kernel of my dream-thoughts — 
found an example in Breslau in the cases of Lasker and Lassalle which 
made it possible to give a simultaneous picture of the two ways in which 
this fatal influence can be exercised. 1 ‘ Cberchez la femme,’ the phrase in 
which these thoughts could be summarized, led me, taken in another 
sense, to my still unmarried brother, whose name is Alexander. 1 now per- 
ceived that ‘Alex,’ the shortened form of the name by which we call him, 
has almost the same sound as an anagram of ‘Lasker,’ and that this factor 
must have had a share in leading my thoughts along the by-path by way 
of Breslau. 

The play which I was making here upon names and syllables had a still 
further sense, however. It expressed a wish that my brother might have a 
happy domestic life, and it did so in this way. In Zola’s novel of an artist’s 
life, L’oeuvre, the subject of which must have been close to my dream- 
thoughts, its author, as is well known, introduced himself and his own do- 
mestic happiness as an episode. He appears under the name of ‘Sandoz.’ 
The transformation was probably arrived at as follows. If ‘Zola’ is written 
backwards (the sort of thing children are so fond of doing), we arrive at 


1 Lasker died of tabes, that is, as a result of an infection (syphilis) contracted from 
a woman; Lassalle, as everyone knows, fell in a duel on account of a woman. 
[George Meredith’s Tragic Comedians is based on his story.] 




318 


VI. The Dream-Work 


‘Aloz.’ No doubt this seemed too undisguised. He therefore replaced ‘Al,’ 
which is the first syllable of ‘Alexander’ by ‘Sand,’ which is the third sylla- 
ble of the same name; and in this way ‘Sandoz’ came into being. My own 
‘Autodidasker’ arose in much the same fashion. 

I must now explain how my phantasy of telling Professor N. that the 
patient we had both examined was only suffering from a neurosis made 
its way into the dream. Shortly before the end of my working year, I 
began the treatment of a new patient who quite baffled my powers of di- 
agnosis. The presence of a grave organic disease — perhaps some degener- 
ation of the spinal cord — strongly suggested itself but could not be 
established. It would have been tempting to diagnose a neurosis (which 
would have solved every difficulty), if only the patient had not repudiated 
with so much energy the sexual history without which 1 refuse to recog- 
nize the presence of a neurosis. In my embarrassment I sought help from 
the physician whom I, like many other people, respect more than any as 
a man and before whose authority I am readiest to bow. He listened to 
my doubts, told me they were justified, and then gave his opinion: ‘Keep 
the man under observation; it must be a neurosis.’ Since I knew he did 
not share my views on the aetiology of the neuroses, I did not produce 
my counter-argument, but I made no concealment of my scepticism. A 
few days later I informed the patient that I could do nothing for him and 
recommended him to seek other advice. Whereupon, to my intense as- 
tonishment, he started apologizing for having lied to me. He had been 
too much ashamed of himself, he said, and went on to reveal precisely the 
piece of sexual aetiology which I had been expecting and without which 
I had been unable to accept his illness as a neurosis. I was relieved but at 
the same time humiliated. I had to admit that my consultant, not being 
led astray by considering the anamnesis, had seen more clearly than I had. 
And I proposed to tell him as much when I next met him — to tell him 
that he had been right and I wrong. 

This was precisely what I did in the dream. But what sort of a wish- 
fulfilment can there have been in confessing that I was wrong? To be 
wrong was, however, just what I did wish. I wanted to be wrong in my 
fears, or, more precisely, I wanted my wife, whose fears I had adopted in 
the dream-thoughts, to be wrong. The subject round which the question 
of right or wrong revolved in the dream was not far removed from what 
the dream-thoughts were really concerned with. There was the same al- 
ternative between organic and functional damage caused by a woman, or, 



A. The Work of Condensation 


319 


more properly, by sexuality: tabetic paralysis or neurosis? (The manner of 
Lassalle’s death could be loosely classed in the latter category.) 

In this closely knit and, when it was carefully interpreted, very trans- 
parent dream, Professor N. played a part not only on account of this anal- 
ogy and of my wish to be wrong, and on account of his incidental 
connections with Breslau and with the family of our friend who had set- 
tled there after her marriage — but also on account of the following 
episode which occurred at the end of our consultation. When he had 
given his opinion and so concluded our medical discussion, he turned to 
more personal subjects: ‘How many children have you got now?’ — 
‘Six.’ — He made a gesture of admiration and concern. — ‘Girls or 
boys?’ — ‘Three and three: they are my pride and my treasure.’ — ‘Well, 
now, be on your guard! Girls are safe enough, but bringing up boys leads 
to difficulties later on.’ — I protested that mine had been very well be- 
haved so far. Evidently this second diagnosis, on the future of my boys, 
pleased me no more than the earlier one, according to which my patient 
was suffering from a neurosis. Thus these two impressions were bound up 
together by their contiguity, by the fact of their having been experienced 
both at once; and in taking the story of the neurosis into my dream, I was 
substituting it for the conversation about up-bringing, which had more 
connection with the dream-thoughts, since it touched so closely upon the 
worries later expressed by my wife. So even my fear that N. might be 
right in what he said about the difficulty of bringing up boys had found 
a place in the dream, for it lay concealed behind the representation of my 
wish that I myself might be wrong in harbouring such fears. The same 
phantasy served unaltered to represent both of the opposing alternatives. 


VI 

‘Early this morning , 1 between dreaming and waking, I experienced a 
very nice example of verbal condensation. In the course of a mass of dream- 
fragments that I could scarcely remember, I was brought up short, as it 
were, by a word which I saw before me as though it were half written and 
half printed. The word was “ erzefilisch,” and it formed part of a sentence 


1 Quoted from Marcinowski [1911.] [This paragraph was added in 1914.] 




320 


VI. The Dream-Work 


which slipped into my conscious memory apart from any context and in 
complete isolation: “That has an erzefilisch influence on the sexual emo- 
tions.” I knew at once that the word ought really to have been “ erzieherisch" 
[“educational”]. And I was in doubt for some time whether the second “e” 
in “ erzefilisch ” should not have been an “z .” 1 In that connection the word 
“syphilis” occurred to me and, starting to analyse the dream while I was still 
half asleep, I racked my brains in an effort to make out how that word 
could have got into my dream, since I had nothing to do with the disease 
either personally or professionally. I then thought of “erzehlerisch” [another 
nonsense word] , and this explained the “e” of the second syllable of “erze- 
filisch” by reminding me that the evening before I had been asked by our 
governess [Erzieherin] to say something to her on the problem of prostitu- 
tion, and had given her Hesse’s book on prostitution in order to influence 
her emotional life — for this had not developed quite normally; after which 
I had talked [erzahlt] a lot to her on the problem. I then saw all at once that 
the word “syphilis” was not to be taken literally, but stood for “poison” — 
of course in relation to sexual life. When translated, therefore, the sentence 
in the dream ran quite logically: “My talk [ Erzdhlun g] was intended to have 
an educational [ erzieherisch ] influence on the emotional life of our gov- 
erness [ Erzieherin ] ; but I fear it may at the same time have had a poisonous 
effect.” “ Erzefilisch ” was compounded from “ erzdh -” and “ erzieh 

The verbal malformations in dreams greatly resemble those which are 
familiar in paranoia but which are also present in hysteria and obsessions. 
The linguistic tricks performed by children , 2 who sometimes actually 
treat words as though they were objects and moreover invent new lan- 
guages and artificial syntactic forms, are the common source of these 
things in dreams and psychoneuroses alike. 

The analysis of the nonsensical verbal forms that occur in dreams 3 is 
particularly well calculated to exhibit the dream-work’s achievements in 


1 [This ingenious example of condensation turns upon the pronunciation of the 
second syllable — the stressed syllable — of the nonsense word. If it is ‘ze,’ it is 
pronounced roughly like the English ‘tsay,’ thus resembling the second syllable 
of ‘erzdhlen and of the invented ‘ erzehlerisch .’ If it is ‘zz’,’ it is pronounced 
roughly like the English ‘tsee,’ thus resembling the second syllable of 
‘ erzieherisch ,’ as well as (less closely) the first syllable of ‘syphilis.’] 

1 See Chapter IV of Freud’s book on jokes (1905c).] 

3 [This paragraph was added in 1916.] 




A. The Work of Condensation 


321 


the way of condensation. The reader should not conclude from the 
paucity of the instances which I have given that material of this kind is 
rare or observed at all exceptionally. On the contrary, it is very common. 
But as a result of the fact that dream-interpretation is dependent upon 
psycho-analytic treatment, only a very small number of instances are ob- 
served and recorded and the analyses of such instances are as a rule only 
intelligible to experts in the pathology of the neuroses. Thus a dream of 
this kind was reported by Dr. von Karpinska (1914) containing the non- 
sensical verbal form: ‘Svingnum elvi .’ It is also worth mentioning those 
cases in which a word appears in a dream which is not in itself meaning- 
less but which has lost its proper meaning and combines a number of 
other meanings to which it is related in just the same way as a ‘meaning- 
less’ word would be. This is what occurred, for instance, in the ten-year- 
old boy’s dream of a ‘category’ which was recorded by Tausk (1913). 
‘Category’ in that case meant ‘female genitals’ and to ‘categorate’ meant 
the same as ‘to micturate.’ 

Where spoken sentences occur in dreams and are expressly distin- 
guished as such from thoughts, it is an invariable rule that the words spo- 
ken in the dream are derived from spoken words remembered in the 
dream-material. The text of the speech is either retained unaltered or ex- 
pressed with some slight displacement. A speech in a dream is often put 
together from various recollected speeches, the text remaining the same 
but being given, if possible, several meanings, or one different from the 
original one. A spoken remark in a dream is not infrequently no more than 
an allusion to an occasion on which the remark in question was made. 1 


1 [ Footnote added 1909:] Not long ago I found a single exception to this rule in 
the case of a young man who suffered from obsessions while retaining intact his 
highly developed intellectual powers. The spoken words which occurred in his 
dreams were not derived from remarks which he had heard or made himself. 
They contained the undistorted text of his obsessional thoughts, which in his 
waking life only reached his consciousness in a modified form. [This young man 
was the subject of Freud’s case history of an obsessional neurotic (the ‘Rat 
Man’); a reference to this point will be found there (Freud, 1909 d) near the be- 
ginning of Section 11(A). — The question of spoken words in dreams is dealt 
with much more fully below on pp. 427 ff.] 




322 


VI. The Dream-Work 


(B) 

THE WORK OF DISPLACEMENT 

In making our collection of instances of condensation in dreams, the ex- 
istence of another relation, probably of no less importance, had already be- 
come evident. It could be seen that the elements which stand out as the 
principal components of the manifest content of the dream are far from 
playing the same part in the dream-thoughts. And, as a corollary, the con- 
verse of this assertion can be affirmed: what is clearly the essence of the 
dream-thoughts need not be represented in the dream at all. The dream is, 
as it were, differently centred from the dream-thoughts — its content has 
different elements as its central point. Thus in the dream of the botanical 
monograph [pp. 193 ffi], for instance, the central point of the dream- 
content was obviously the element ‘botanical’; whereas the dream-thoughts 
were concerned with the complications and conflicts arising between col- 
leagues from their professional obligations, and further with the charge that 
I was in the habit of sacrificing too much for the sake of my hobbies. The 
element ‘botanical’ had no place whatever in this core of the dream- 
thoughts, unless it was loosely connected with it by an antithesis — the fact 
that botany never had a place among my favourite studies. In my patient’s 
Sappho dream [pp. 302 ff.] the central position was occupied by climbing 
up and down and being up above and down below; the dream-thoughts, 
however, dealt with the dangers of sexual relations with people of an infe- 
rior social class. So that only a single element of the dream-thoughts seems 
to have found its way into the dream-content, though that element was ex- 
panded to a disproportionate extent. Similarly, in the dream of the may- 
beetles [pp. 307 ff], the topic of which was the relations of sexuality to 
cruelty, it is true that the factor of cruelty emerged in the dream-content; 
but it did so in another connection and without any mention of sexuality, 
that is to say, divorced from its context and consequently transformed into 
something extraneous. Once again, in my dream about my uncle [pp. 162 
ff.] , the fair beard which formed its centre-point seems to have had no con- 
nection in its meaning with my ambitious wishes which, as we saw, were 
the core of the dream-thoughts. Dreams such as these give a justifiable im- 
pression of ‘displacement.’ In complete contrast to these examples, we can 



B. The Work of Displacement 


323 


see that in the dream of Irma’s injection [pp. 131 ff.] the different elements 
were able to retain, during the process of constructing the dream, the ap- 
proximate place which they occupied in the dream-thoughts. This further 
relation between the dream-thoughts and the dream-content, wholly vari- 
able as it is in its sense or direction, is calculated at first to create astonish- 
ment. If we are considering a psychical process in normal life and find that 
one out of its several component ideas has been picked out and has ac- 
quired a special degree of vividness in consciousness, we usually regard this 
effect as evidence that a specially high amount of psychical value — some 
particular degree of interest — attaches to this predominant idea. But we 
now discover that, in the case of the different elements of the dream- 
thoughts, a value of this kind does not persist or is disregarded in the pro- 
cess of dream-formation. There is never any doubt as to which of the 
elements of the dream-thoughts have the highest psychical value; we learn 
that by direct judgement. In the course of the formation of a dream these 
essential elements, charged, as they are, with intense interest, may be treated 
as though they were of small value, and their place may be taken in the 
dream by other elements, of whose small value in the dream-thoughts there 
can be no question. At first sight it looks as though no attention whatever 
is paid to the psychical intensity 1 of the various ideas in making the choice 
among them for the dream, and as though the only thing considered is the 
greater or less degree of multiplicity of their determination. What appears 
in dreams, we might suppose, is not what is important in the dream- 
thoughts but what occurs in them several times over. But this hypothesis 
does not greatly assist our understanding of dream-formation, since from 
the nature of things it seems clear that the two factors of multiple determi- 
nation and inherent psychical value must necessarily operate in the same 
sense. The ideas which are most important among the dream-thoughts will 
almost certainly be those which occur most often in them, since the differ- 
ent dream-thoughts will, as it were, radiate out from them. Nevertheless a 
dream can reject elements which are thus both highly stressed in themselves 
and reinforced from many directions, and can select for its content other 
elements which possess only the second of these attributes. 

In order to solve this difficulty we shall make use of another impres- 
sion derived from our enquiry [in the previous section] into the over- 
determination of the dream-content. Perhaps some of those who have read 


1 Psychical intensity or value or the degree of interest of an idea is of course to be 
distinguished from sensory intensity or the intensity of the image presented. 




324 


VI. The Dream-Work 


that enquiry may already have formed an independent conclusion that the 
overdetermination of the elements of dreams is no very important discov- 
ery, since it is a self-evident one. For in analysis we start out from the 
dream-elements and note down all the associations which lead off from 
them; so that there is nothing surprising in the fact that in the thought- 
material arrived at in this way we come across these same elements with 
peculiar frequency. I cannot accept this objection; but I will myself put 
into words something that sounds not unlike it. Among the thoughts that 
analysis brings to light are many which are relatively remote from the ker- 
nel of the dream and which look like artificial interpolations made for 
some particular purpose. That purpose is easy to divine. It is precisely they 
that constitute a connection, often a forced and far-fetched one, between 
the dream-content and the dream-thoughts; and if these elements were 
weeded out of the analysis the result would often be that the component 
parts of the dream-content would be left not only without overdetermina- 
tion but without any satisfactory determination at all. We shall be led to 
conclude that the multiple determination which decides what shall be in- 
cluded in a dream is not always a primary factor in dream-construction 
but is often the secondary product of a psychical force which is still un- 
known to us. Nevertheless multiple determination must be of importance 
in choosing what particular elements shall enter a dream, since we can see 
that a considerable expenditure of effort is used to bring it about in cases 
where it does not arise from the dream-material unassisted. 

It thus seems plausible to suppose that in the dream-work a psychical 
force is operating which on the one hand strips the elements which have a 
high psychical value of their intensity, and on the other hand, by means of 
over-determination, creates from elements of low psychical value new values, 
which afterwards find their way into the dream-content. If that is so, a 
transference and displacement of psychical intensities occurs in the process of 
dream-formation, and it is as a result of these that the difference between 
the text of the dream-content and that of the dream-thoughts comes 
about. The process which we are here presuming is nothing less than the 
essential portion of the dream-work; and it deserves to be described as 
‘dream-displacement.’ Dream-displacement and dream-condensation are 
the two governing factors to whose activity we may in essence ascribe the 
form assumed by dreams. 

Nor do I think we shall have any difficulty in recognizing the psychical 
force which manifests itself in the facts of dream-displacement. The con- 
sequence of the displacement is that the dream-content no longer resem- 



B. The Work of Displacement 


325 


bles the core of the dream-thoughts and that the dream gives no more than 
a distortion of the dream-wish which exists in the unconscious. But we are 
already familiar with dream-distortion. We traced it back to the censorship 
which is exercised by one psychical agency in the mind over another. [See 
pp. 167 ff.] Dream-displacement is one of the chief methods by which 
that distortion is achieved. Is fecit cui profuit } We may assume, then, that 
dream-displacement comes about through the influence of the same cen- 
sorship — that is, the censorship of endopsychic defence. 2 

1 [The old legal tag: ‘He did the deed who gained by it.’] 

2 [ Footnote added 1909:] Since I may say that the kernel of my theory of dreams 
lies in my derivation of dream-distortion from the censorship, I will here insert 
the last part of a story from Phantasien eines Realisten [ Phantasies of a Realist ] by 
‘Lynkeus’ (Vienna, 2nd edition, 1900 [1st edition, 1899]), in which I have found 
this principal feature of my theory once more expounded. [See above, Postscript, 
1909, to Chapter I, pp. 120 £; also Freud, 1923/'and 1932c.] The title of the 
story is ‘Traumen wie Wachen,’ [‘Dreaming Like Waking’]: 

‘About a man who has the remarkable attribute of never dreaming nonsense. . . . 

“‘This splendid gift of yours, for dreaming as though you were waking, is a 
consequence of your virtues, of your kindness, your sense of justice, and your 
love of truth; it is the moral serenity of your nature which makes me understand 
all about you.” 

“‘But when I think the matter over properly,” replied the other, “I almost be- 
lieve that everyone is made like me, and that no one at all ever dreams nonsense. 
Any dream which one can remember clearly enough to describe it afterwards — 
any dream, that is to say, which is not a fever-dream — must always make sense, 
and it cannot possibly be otherwise. For things that were mutually contradictory 
could not group themselves into a single whole. The fact that time and space are 
often thrown into confusion does not affect the true content of the dream, since 
no doubt neither of them are of significance for its real essence. We often do the 
same thing in waking life. Only think of fairy tales and of the many daring prod- 
ucts of the imagination, which are full of meaning and of which only a man 
without intelligence could say: ‘This is nonsense, for it’s impossible.’” 

“‘If only one always knew how to interpret dreams in the right way, as you 
have just done with mine!” said his friend. 

“‘That is certainly no easy task; but with a little attention on the part of the 
dreamer himself it should no doubt always succeed. — You ask why it is that for 
the most part it does not succeed? In you other people there seems always to be 
something that lies concealed in your dreams, something unchaste in a special 
and higher sense, a certain secret quality in your being which it is hard to follow. 
And that is why your dreams so often seem to be without meaning or even to be 
nonsense. But in the deepest sense this is not in the least so; indeed, it cannot be 
so at all — for it is always the same man, whether he is awake or dreaming.’” 




326 


VI. The Dream-Work 


The question of the interplay of these factors — of displacement, con- 
densation and overdetermination — in the construction of dreams, and 
the question which is a dominant factor and which a subordinate one — 
all of this we shall leave aside for later investigation. [See e.g. pp. 415 ff.] 
But we can state provisionally a second condition which must be satisfied 
by those elements of the dream-thoughts which make their way into the 
dream: they must escape the censorship imposed by resistance } And hence- 
forward in interpreting dreams we shall take dream-displacement into ac- 
count as an undeniable fact. 


(C) 

THE MEANS OF REPRESENTATION IN DREAMS 

In the process of transforming the latent thoughts into the manifest 
content of a dream we have found two factors at work: dream-condensa- 
tion and dream-displacement. As we continue our investigation we shall, 
in addition to these, come across two further determinants which exercise 
an undoubted influence on the choice of the material which is to find ac- 
cess to the dream. 

But first, even at the risk of appearing to bring our progress to a halt, I 
should like to take a preliminary glance at the processes involved in carry- 
ing out the interpretation of a dream. I cannot disguise from myself that 
the easiest way of making those processes clear and of defending their 
trustworthiness against criticism would be to take some particular dream 
as a sample, go through its interpretation (just as I have done with the 
dream of Irma’s injection in my second chapter), and then collect the 
dream-thoughts which I have discovered and go on to reconstruct from 
them the process by which the dream was formed — in other words, to 
complete a dream-analysis by a dream-synthesis. I have in fact carried out 
that task for my own instruction on several specimens; but I cannot repro- 
duce them here, since I am forbidden to do so for reasons connected with 
the nature of the psychical material involved — reasons which are of many 
kinds and which will be accepted as valid by any reasonable person. Such 


1 [The first condition being that they must be overdetermined. (See pp. 324 £)] 




C. The Means of Representation 


327 


considerations interfered less in the analysis of dreams, since an analysis 
could be incomplete and nevertheless retain its value, even though it pen- 
etrated only a small way into the texture of the dream. But in the case of 
the synthesis of a dream I do not see how it can be convincing unless it is 
complete. I could only give a complete synthesis of dreams dreamt by 
people unknown to the reading public. Since, however, this condition is 
fulfilled only by my patients, who are neurotics, I must postpone this part 
of my exposition of the subject till I am able — in another volume — to 
carry the psychological elucidation of neuroses to a point at which it can 
make contact with our present topic. 1 

My attempts at building up dreams by synthesis from the dream- 
thoughts have taught me that the material which emerges in the course of 
interpretation is not all of the same value. One part of it is made up of the 
essential dream-thoughts — those, that is, which completely replace the 
dream, and which, if there were no censorship of dreams, would be suffi- 
cient in themselves to replace it. The other part of the material is usually to 
be regarded as of less importance. Nor is it possible to support the view that 
all the thoughts of this second kind had a share in the formation of the 
dream. (See pp. 298 and 535.) On the contrary, there may be associations 
among them which relate to events that occurred after the dream, between 
the times of dreaming and interpreting. This part of the material includes 
all the connecting paths that led from the manifest dream-content to the 
latent dream-thoughts, as well as the intermediate and linking associations 
by means of which, in the course of the process of interpretation, we came 
to discover these connecting paths. 2 


1 [ Footnote added 1909:] Since writing the above words, I have published a com- 
plete analysis and synthesis of two dreams in my ‘Fragment of the Analysis of a 
Case of Hysteria’ [Freud, 1905e (Sections II and III). See also the synthesis of 
the ‘Wolf Man’s’ dream in Section IV of Freud (1918 b). — Added 1914:] Otto 
Rank’s analysis, ‘Ein Traum, der sich selbst deutet’ [‘A Dream which Interprets 
Itself,’ 1910], deserves mention as the most complete interpretation that has 
been published of a dream of considerable length. 

2 [The last four sentences (beginning with ‘the other part of the material’) date in 
their present form from 1919. In editions earlier than that, this passage ran as 
follows: ‘The other part of the material may be brought together under the term 
“collaterals.” As a whole, they constitute the paths over which the true wish, 
which arises from the dream-thoughts, passes before becoming the dream-wish. 
The first set of these “collaterals” consist in derivatives from the dream-thoughts 
proper; they are, schematically regarded, displacements from what is essential to 




328 


VI. The Dream-Work 


We are here interested only in the essential dream-thoughts. These 
usually emerge as a complex of thoughts and memories of the most intri- 
cate possible structure, with all the attributes of the trains of thought fa- 
miliar to us in waking life. They are not infrequently trains of thought 
starting out from more than one centre, though having points of contact. 
Each train of thought is almost invariably accompanied by its contradic- 
tory counterpart, linked with it by antithetical association. 

The different portions of this complicated structure stand, of course, in 
the most manifold logical relations to one another. They can represent 
foreground and background, digressions and illustrations, conditions, 
chains of evidence and counter-arguments. When the whole mass of these 
dream-thoughts is brought under the pressure of the dream-work, and its 
elements are turned about, broken into fragments and jammed together — 
almost like pack-ice — the question arises of what happens to the logical 
connections which have hitherto formed its framework. What representa- 
tion do dreams provide for ‘if,’ ‘because,’ ‘just as,’ ‘although,’ ‘either — or,’ 
and all the other conjunctions without which we cannot understand sen- 
tences or speeches? 

In the first resort our answer must be that dreams have no means at 
their disposal for representing these logical relations between the dream- 
thoughts. For the most part dreams disregard all these conjunctions, and 
it is only the substantive content of the dream-thoughts that they take over 
and manipulate . 1 The restoration of the connections which the dream- 
work has destroyed is a task which has to be performed by the interpreta- 
tive process. 

The incapacity of dreams to express these things must lie in the nature 
of the psychical material out of which dreams are made. The plastic arts 
of painting and sculpture labour, indeed, under a similar limitation as 


what is inessential. A second set of them comprise the thoughts that connect 
these inessential elements (which have become important owing to displace- 
ment) with one another, and extend from them to the dream-content. Finally, a 
third set consist in the associations and trains of thought by means of which the 
work of interpretation leads us from the dream-content to the second group of 
collaterals. It need not be supposed that the whole of this third set were neces- 
sarily also concerned in the formation of the dream.’ With reference to this pas- 
sage Freud remarks in Ges. Schr., $ (1925), 55 that he has dropped the term 
‘collaterals.’ In fact, however, the term has survived below on p. 535.] 

1 [A qualification of this statement will be found below, p. 458 n.] 




C. The Means of Representation 


329 


compared with poetry, which can make use of speech; and here once again 
the reason for their incapacity lies in the nature of the material which these 
two forms of art manipulate in their effort to express something. Before 
painting became acquainted with the laws of expression by which it is gov- 
erned, it made attempts to get over this handicap. In ancient paintings 
small labels were hung from the mouths of the persons represented, con- 
taining in written characters the speeches which the artist despaired of rep- 
resenting pictorially. 

At this point an objection may perhaps be raised in dispute of the idea 
that dreams are unable to represent logical relations. For there are dreams 
in which the most complicated intellectual operations take place, state- 
ments are contradicted or confirmed, ridiculed or compared, just as they 
are in waking thought. But here again appearances are deceitful. If we go 
into the interpretation of dreams such as these, we find that the whole of 
this is part of the material of the dream-thoughts and is not a representation 
of intellectual ivork performed during the dream itself What is reproduced 
by the ostensible thinking in the dream is the subject-matter of the dream- 
thoughts and not the mutual relations between them , the assertion of 
which constitutes thinking. I shall bring forward some instances of this. 
[See pp. 449 ffi] But the easiest point to establish in this connection is 
that all spoken sentences which occur in dreams and are specifically de- 
scribed as such are unmodified or slightly modified reproductions of 
speeches which are also to be found among the recollections in the mate- 
rial of the dream-thoughts. A speech of this kind is often no more than 
an allusion to some event included among the dream-thoughts, and the 
meaning of the dream may be a totally different one. [See pp. 427 ffi] 

Nevertheless, I will not deny that critical thought-activity which is not 
a mere repetition of material in the dream-thoughts does have a share in 
the formation of dreams. I shall have to elucidate the part played by this 
factor at the end of the present discussion. It will then become apparent 
that this thought-activity is not produced by the dream-thoughts but by 
the dream itself after it has already, in a certain sense, been completed. 
[See the last Section of this Chapter (p. 493).] 

Provisionally, then, it may be said that the logical relations between the 
dream-thoughts are not given any separate representation in dreams. For 
instance, if a contradiction occurs in a dream, it is either a contradiction 
of the dream itself or a contradiction derived from the subject-matter of 
one of the dream-thoughts. A contradiction in a dream can only corre- 
spond in an exceedingly indirect manner to a contradiction betiveen the 



330 


VI. The Dream-Work 


dream-thoughts. But just as the art of painting eventually found a way of 
expressing, by means other than the floating labels, at least the intention of 
the words of the personages represented — affection, threats, warnings, and 
so on — so too there is a possible means by which dreams can take account 
of some of the logical relations between their dream-thoughts, by making 
an appropriate modification in the method of representation characteristic 
of dreams. Experience shows that different dreams vary greatly in this re- 
spect. While some dreams completely disregard the logical sequence of 
their material, others attempt to give as full an indication of it as possible. 
In doing so dreams depart sometimes more and sometimes less widely 
from the text that is at their disposal for manipulation. Incidentally dreams 
vary similarly in their treatment of the chronological sequence of the 
dream-thoughts, if such a sequence has been established in the uncon- 
scious (as, for instance, in the dream of Irma’s injection. [Pp. 131 ff.]). 

What means does the dream-work possess for indicating these relations 
in the dream-thoughts which it is so hard to represent? I will attempt to 
enumerate them one by one. 

In the first place, dreams take into account in a general way the con- 
nection which undeniably exists between all the portions of the dream- 
thoughts by combining the whole material into a single situation or event. 
They reproduce logical connection by simultaneity in time. Here they are 
acting like the painter who, in a picture of the School of Athens or of Par- 
nassus, represents in one group all the philosophers or all the poets. It is 
true that they were never in fact assembled in a single hall or on a single 
mountain-top; but they certainly form a group in the conceptual sense. 

Dreams carry this method of reproduction down to details. Whenever 
they show us two elements close together, this guarantees that there is 
some specially intimate connection between what correspond to them 
among the dream-thoughts. In the same way, in our system of writing, ‘ ah’ 
means that the two letters are to be pronounced in a single syllable. If a 
gap is left between the ‘ a and the A,’ it means that the ‘ a is the last letter 
of one word and the 'h' is the first of the next one. 1 So, too, collocations 
in dreams do not consist of any chance, disconnected portions of the 


1 [This simile is a favourite one of Freud’s. He uses it above on p. 265 and again 
in the middle of Section I of the case history of Dora (1905c). It is possibly de- 
rived from a lyric of Goethe’s (‘Schwer in Waides Busch’) in which the same im- 
age occurs.] 




C. The Means of Representation 


331 


dream-material, but of portions which are fairly closely connected in the 
dream-thoughts as well. 

For representing causal relations dreams have two procedures which are 
in essence the same. Suppose the dream-thoughts run like this: ‘Since this 
was so and so, such and such was bound to happen.’ Then the commoner 
method of representation would be to introduce the dependent clause as an 
introductory dream and to add the principal clause as the main dream. If I 
have interpreted aright, the temporal sequence may be reversed. But the 
more extensive part of the dream always corresponds to the principal clause. 

One of my women patients once produced an excellent instance of this 
way of representing causality in a dream which I shall later record fully. [See 
pp. 361 f£; also discussed on pp. 335 and 340.] It consisted of a short pre- 
lude and a very diffuse piece of dream which was centred to a marked de- 
gree on a single theme and might be entided ‘The Language of Flowers.’ 

The introductory dream was as follows: She went into the kitchen, 
where her two maids were, and found fault with them for not having got her 
‘bite of food’ ready. At the same time she saw a very large quantity of common 
kitchen crockery standing upside down in the kitchen to drain; it was piled 
up in heaps. The two maids ivent to fetch some water and had to step into a 
kind of river ivhich came right up to the house or into the yard. The main 
dream then followed, beginning thus: She was descending from a height 
over some strangely constructed palisades, and felt glad that her dress was not 
caught in them . . . etc. 

The introductory dream related to the dreamer’s parents’ home. No 
doubt she had often heard her mother using the words that occurred in 
the dream. The heaps of common crockery were derived from a modest 
hardware shop which was located in the same building. The other part of 
the dream contained a reference to her father, who used always to run after 
the maids and who eventually contracted a fatal illness during a flood. 
(The house stood near a river-bank.) Thus the thought concealed behind 
the introductory dream ran as follows: ‘Because I was born in this house, 
in such mean and depressing circumstances . . .’ The main dream took up 
the same thought and presented it in a form modified by wish-fulfilment: 
‘1 am of high descent.’ Thus the actual underlying thought was: ‘Because 
I am of such low descent, the course of my life has been so and so.’ 

The division of a dream into two unequal parts does not invariably, so 
far as I can see, signify that there is a causal relation between the thoughts 
behind the two parts. It often seems as though the same material were 



332 


VI. The Dream-Work 


being represented in the two dreams from different points of view. (This 
is certainly the case where a series of dreams during one night end in an 
emission or orgasm — a series in which the somatic need finds its way to 
progressively clearer expression.) 1 Or the two dreams may have sprung 
from separate centres in the dream-material, and their content may over- 
lap, so that what is the centre in one dream is present as a mere hint in 
the other, and vice versa. But in a certain number of dreams a division 
into a shorter preliminary dream and a longer sequel does in fact signify 
that there is a causal relation between the two pieces. 

The other method of representing a causal relation is adapted to less 
extensive material and consists in one image in the dream, whether of a 
person or thing, being transformed into another. The existence of a causal 
relation is only to be taken seriously if the transformation actually occurs 
before our eyes and not if we merely notice that one thing has appeared 
in the place of another. 

I have said that the two methods of representing a causal relation were 
in essence the same. In both cases causation is represented by temporal se- 
quence: in one instance by a sequence of dreams and in the other by the 
direct transformation of one image into another. In the great majority of 
cases, it must be confessed, the causal relation is not represented at all but 
is lost in the confusion of elements which inevitably occurs in the process 
of dreaming. 

The alternative ‘either — or’ cannot be expressed in dreams in any way 
whatever. Both of the alternatives are usually inserted in the text of the 
dream as though they were equally valid. The dream of Irma’s injection 
contains a classic instance of this. Its latent thoughts clearly ran [see p. 143]: 
‘I am not responsible for the persistence of Irma’s pains; the responsibility 
lies either in her recalcitrance to accepting my solution, or in the un- 
favourable sexual conditions under which she lives and which I cannot al- 
ter, or in the fact that her pains are not hysterical at all but of an organic 
nature.’ The dream, on the other hand, fulfilled all of these possibilities 
(which were almost mutually exclusive), and did not hesitate to add a 
fourth solution, based on the dream-wish. After interpreting the dream, I 
proceeded to insert the ‘either — or’ into the context of the dream-thoughts. 


1 [This sentence was added in 1914. The point is further mentioned on p. 350 
and discussed at greater length on pp. 412-14. The whole subject of dreams oc- 
curring on the same night is dealt with on pp. 348 ffi] 




C. The Means of Representation 


333 


If, however, in reproducing a dream, its narrator feels inclined to make 
use of an ‘either — or’ — e.g. ‘it was either a garden or a sitting-room’ — 
what was present in the dream-thoughts was not an alternative but an 
‘and,’ a simple addition. An ‘either — or’ is mostly used to describe a 
dream-element that has a quality of vagueness — which, however, is capa- 
ble of being resolved. In such cases the rule for interpretation is: treat the 
two apparent alternatives as of equal validity and link them together with 
an ‘and.’ 

For instance, on one occasion a friend of mine was stopping in Italy 
and I had been without his address for a considerable time. I then had a 
dream of receiving a telegram containing this address. I saw it printed in 
blue on the telegraph form. The first word was vague: 

‘ Via,’ perhaps j 

or ‘ Villa 1 ; the second was clear: ‘Secerno.’ 

or possibly even (‘ Casa) J 

The second word sounded like some Italian name and reminded me of 
discussions I had had with my friend on the subject of etymology. It also 
expressed my anger with him for having kept his address secret from me for 
so long. On the other hand, each of the three alternatives for the first word 
turned out on analysis to be an independent and equally valid starting- 
point for a chain of thoughts. 1 

During the night before my father’s funeral I had a dream of a printed 
notice, placard or poster — rather like the notices forbidding one to smoke 
in railway waiting-rooms — on which appeared either 

‘You are requested to close the eyes’ 
or, ‘You are requested to close an eye.’ 

I usually write this in the form: 


the 

‘You are requested to close eye(s).’ 

an 


1 [This dream will be found described in greater detail in Freud’s letter to Fliess 
(the friend in question) of April 28, 1897. See Freud, 195C )a, Letter 60.] 




334 


VI. The Dream-Work 


Each of these two versions had a meaning of its own and led in a different 
direction when the dream was interpreted. I had chosen the simplest pos- 
sible ritual for the funeral, for I knew my father’s own views on such cer- 
emonies. But some other members of the family were not sympathetic to 
such puritanical simplicity and thought we should be disgraced in the 
eyes of those who attended the funeral. Hence one of the versions: ‘You 
are requested to close an eye,’ i.e. to ‘wink at’ or ‘overlook.’ Here it is par- 
ticularly easy to see the meaning of the vagueness expressed by the 
‘either — or.’ The dream-work failed to establish a unified wording for the 
dream-thoughts which could at the same time be ambiguous, and the two 
main lines of thought consequently began to diverge even in the manifest 
content of the dream . 1 

In a few instances the difficulty of representing an alternative is got 
over by dividing the dream into two pieces of equal length. 

The way in which dreams treat the category of contraries and contra- 
dictories is highly remarkable. It is simply disregarded. ‘No’ seems not to 
exist so far as dreams are concerned . 2 They show a particular preference 
for combining contraries into a unity or for representing them as one and 
the same thing. Dreams feel themselves at liberty, moreover, to represent 
any element by its wishful contrary; so there is no way of deciding at a 
first glance whether any element that admits of a contrary is present in 
the dream-thoughts as a positive or as a negative . 3 


1 [This dream is reported by Freud in a letter to Fliess of November 2, 1896. (See 
Freud, 1950a, Letter 50.) It is there stated to have occurred during the night after 
the funeral.] 

1 [Qualifications of this assertion occur on pp. 341, 351 f. and 442 f. — In its first 
wording the dream referred to closing the dead man’s eyes as a filial duty.] 

3 [ Footnote added 1911:] I was astonished to learn from a pamphlet by K. Abel, 
The Antithetical Meaning of Primal Words (1884) (cf. my review of it, 1910c) — 
and the fact has been confirmed by other philologists — that the most ancient 
languages behave exactly like dreams in this respect. In the first instance they 
have only a single word to describe the two contraries at the extreme ends of a 
series of qualities or activities (e.g. ‘strong-weak,’ ‘old-young,’ ‘far-near,’ ‘bind- 
sever’); they only form distinct terms for the two contraries by a secondary pro- 
cess of making small modifications in the common word. Abel demonstrates this 
particularly from Ancient Egyptian; but he shows that there are distinct traces 
of the same course of development in the Semitic and Indo-Germanic languages 
as well. [See also p. 477.] 




C. The Means of Representation 


335 


In one of the dreams recorded just above, the first clause of which has 
already been interpreted (‘because my descent was such and such’ [see 
p. 331]), the dreamer saw herself climbing down over some palisades 
holding a blossoming branch in her hand. In connection with this image 
she thought of the angel holding a spray of lilies in pictures of the 
Annunciation — her own name was Maria — and of girls in white robes 
walking in Corpus Christi processions, when the streets are decorated 
with green branches. Thus the blossoming branch in the dream without 
any doubt alluded to sexual innocence. However, the branch was covered 
with red flowers, each of which was like a camellia. By the end of her 
walk — so the dream went on — the blossoms were already a good deal 
faded. There then followed some unmistakable allusions to menstruation. 
Accordingly, the same branch which was carried like a lily and as though 
by an innocent girl was at the same time an allusion to the Dame aux 
camelias who, as we know, usually wore a white camellia, except during 
her periods, when she wore a red one. The same blossoming branch (cf. 
‘des Madchens Bliiten’ [‘the maiden’s blossoms’] in Goethe’s poem ‘Der 
Miillerin Verrat’) represented both sexual innocence and its contrary. And 
the same dream which expressed her joy at having succeeded in passing 
through life immaculately gave one glimpses at certain points (e.g. in the 
fading of the blossoms) of the contrary train of ideas — of her having been 
guilty of various sins against sexual purity (in her childhood, that is). In 
analysing the dream it was possible clearly to distinguish the two trains of 
thought, of which the consoling one seemed the more superficial and the 
self-reproachful one the deeper-lying — trains of thought which were dia- 
metrically opposed to each other but whose similar though contrary ele- 
ments were represented by the same elements in the manifest dream. 1 

One and one only of these logical relations is very highly favoured by 
the mechanism of dream-formation; namely, the relation of similarity, 
consonance or approximation — the relation of ‘just as.’ This relation, un- 
like any other, is capable of being represented in dreams in a variety of 
ways. 2 Parallels or instances of ‘just as’ inherent in the material of the 
dream-thoughts constitute the first foundations for the construction of a 


1 [The dream is fully reported on p. 361 below.] 

2 [Footnote added 1914:] Cf. Aristotle’s remark on the qualifications of a dream- 
interpreter quoted above on p. 122 n. 




336 


VI. The Dream-Work 


dream; and no inconsiderable part of the dream-work consists in creating 
fresh parallels where those which are already present cannot find their way 
into the dream owing to the censorship imposed by resistance. The rep- 
resentation of the relation of similarity is assisted by the tendency of the 
dream-work towards condensation. 

Similarity, consonance, the possession of common attributes — all these 
are represented in dreams by unification, which may either be present al- 
ready in the material of the dream-thoughts or may be freshly constructed. 
The first of these possibilities may be described as ‘identification’ and the 
second as ‘composition.’ Identification is employed where persons are con- 
cerned; composition where things are the material of the unification. Nev- 
ertheless composition may also be applied to persons. Localities are often 
treated like persons. 

In identification, only one of the persons who are linked by a common 
element succeeds in being represented in the manifest content of the 
dream, while the second or remaining persons seem to be suppressed in it. 
But this single covering figure appears in the dream in all the relations and 
situations which apply either to him or to the figures which he covers. In 
composition, where this is extended to persons, the dream-image contains 
features which are peculiar to one or other of the persons concerned but 
not common to them; so that the combination of these features leads to 
the appearance of a new unity, a composite figure. The actual process of 
composition can be carried out in various ways. On the one hand, the 
dream-figure may bear the name of one of the persons related to it — in 
which case we simply know directly, in a manner analogous to our waking 
knowledge, that this or that person is intended — while its visual features 
may belong to the other person. Or, on the other hand, the dream-image 
itself may be composed of visual features belonging in reality partly to the 
one person and partly to the other. Or again the second person’s share in 
the dream-image may lie, not in its visual features, but in the gestures that 
we attribute to it, the words that we make it speak, or the situation in 
which we place it. In this last case the distinction between identification 
and the construction of a composite figure begins to lose its sharpness . 1 


1 [On the subject of composite figures cf. also pp. 310 ff. The next three sentences 
were added in 1911. The final sentence of the paragraph was added in 1 9 14. — 
‘Identification’ in this passage is evidently being used in a sense different from 
that discussed on pp. 173 ff] 




C. The Means of Representation 


337 


But it may also happen that the formation of a composite figure of this 
kind is unsuccessful. If so, the scene in the dream is attributed to one of 
the persons concerned, while the other (and usually the more important 
one) appears as an attendant figure without any other function. The 
dreamer may describe the position in such a phrase as: ‘My mother was 
there as well.’ (Stekel.) An element of this kind in the dream-content may 
be compared to the ‘determinatives’ used in hieroglyphic script, which are 
not meant to be pronounced but serve merely to elucidate other signs. 

The common element which justifies, or rather causes, the combina- 
tion of the two persons may be represented in the dream or may be omit- 
ted from it. As a rule the identification or construction of a composite 
person takes place for the very purpose of avoiding the representation of 
the common element. Instead of saying: ‘A has hostile feelings towards 
me and so has B,’ I make a composite figure out of A and B in the dream, 
or I imagine A performing an act of some other kind which is character- 
istic of B. The dream-figure thus constructed appears in the dream in 
some quite new connection, and the circumstance that it represents both 
A and B justifies me in inserting at the appropriate point in the dream the 
element which is common to both of them, namely a hostile attitude to- 
wards me. It is often possible in this way to achieve quite a remarkable 
amount of condensation in the content of a dream; I can save myself the 
need for giving a direct representation of very complicated circumstances 
relating to one person, if I can find another person to whom some of 
these circumstances apply equally. It is easy to see, too, how well this 
method of representation by means of identification can serve to evade 
the censorship due to resistance, which imposes such severe conditions 
upon the dream-work. What the censorship objects to may lie precisely 
in certain ideas which, in the material of the dream-thoughts, are at- 
tached to a particular person; so I proceed to find a second person, who 
is also connected with the objectionable material, but only with part of 
it. The contact between the two persons upon this censorable point now 
justifies me in constructing a composite figure characterized by indiffer- 
ent features derived from both. This figure, arrived at by identification or 
composition, is then admissible to the dream-content without censorship, 
and thus, by making use of dream-condensation, I have satisfied the 
claims of the dream-censorship. 

When a common element between two persons is represented in a 
dream, it is usually a hint for us to look for another, concealed common el- 
ement whose representation has been made impossible by the censorship. 



338 


VI. The Dream-Work 


A displacement in regard to the common element has been made in order, 
as it were, to facilitate its representation. The fact that the composite figure 
appears in the dream with an indifferent common element leads us to con- 
clude that there is another far from indifferent common element present in 
the dream-thoughts. 

Accordingly, identification or the construction of composite figures 
serves various purposes in dreams: firstly to represent an element com- 
mon to two persons, secondly to represent a displaced common element, 
and thirdly, too, to express a merely wishful common element. Since 
wishing that two persons had a common element frequently coincides 
with exchanging one for the other, this latter relation is also expressed in 
dreams by means of identification. In the dream of Irma’s injection, I 
wished to exchange her for another patient: I wished, that is, that the 
other woman might be my patient just as Irma was. The dream took this 
wish into account by showing me a person who was called Irma, but who 
was examined in a position in which I had only had occasion to see the 
other woman [pp. 133 fi]. In the dream about my uncle an exchange of 
this kind became the central point of the dream: I identified myself with 
the Minister by treating and judging my colleagues no better than he did. 

[P.215.] 

It is my experience, and one to which I have found no exception, that 
every dream deals with the dreamer himself. Dreams are completely ego- 
istical. 1 Whenever my own ego does not appear in the content of the 
dream, but only some extraneous person, I may safely assume that my 
own ego lies concealed, by identification, behind this other person; I can 
insert my ego into the context. On other occasions, when my own ego 
does appear in the dream, the situation in which it occurs may teach me 
that some other person lies concealed, by identification, behind my ego. 
In that case the dream should warn me to transfer on to myself, when I 
am interpreting the dream, the concealed common element attached to 
this other person. There are also dreams in which my ego appears along 
with other people who, when the identification is resolved, are revealed 
once again as my ego. These identifications should then make it possible 
for me to bring into contact with my ego certain ideas whose acceptance 
has been forbidden by the censorship. Thus my ego may be represented 
in a dream several times over, now directly and now through identifica- 


1 [Footnote added 1925:] Cf. the footnote on pp. 288. 




C. The Means of Representation 


339 


tion with extraneous persons. By means of a number of such identifica- 
tions it becomes possible to condense an extraordinary amount of 
thought-material. 1 The fact that the dreamer’s own ego appears several 
times, or in several forms, in a dream is at bottom no more remarkable 
than that the ego should be contained in a conscious thought several 
times or in different places or connections — e.g. in the sentence ‘when / 
think what a healthy child / was.’ 2 

Identifications in the case of proper names of localities are resolved 
even more easily than in the case of persons, since here there is no inter- 
ference by the ego, which occupies such a dominating place in dreams. In 
one of my dreams about Rome (see pp. 217 £), the place in which I 
found myself was called Rome, but I was astonished at the quantity of 
German posters at a street-corner. This latter point was a wish-fulfilment, 
which at once made me think of Prague; and the wish itself may perhaps 
have dated from a German-nationalist phase which I passed through dur- 
ing my youth, but have since got over. 3 At the time at which I had the 
dream there was a prospect of my meeting my friend [Fliess] in Prague; 
so that the identification of Rome and Prague can be explained as a wish- 
ful common element: I would rather have met my friend in Rome than 
in Prague and would have liked to exchange Prague for Rome for the pur- 
pose of this meeting. 

The possibility of creating composite structures stands foremost among 
the characteristics which so often lend dreams a fantastic appearance, for 
it introduces into the content of dreams elements which could never have 
been objects of actual perception. 4 The psychical process of constructing 
composite images in dreams is evidently the same as when we imagine or 
portray a centaur or a dragon in waking life. The only difference is that 
what determines the production of the imaginary figure in waking life is 
the impression which the new structure itself is intended to make; whereas 


1 When I am in doubt behind which of the figures appearing in the dream my ego 
is to be looked for, I observe the following rule: the person who in the dream 
feels an emotion which I myself experience in my sleep is the one who conceals 
my ego. 

2 [This sentence was added in 1925. The point is dealt with further in Freud, 
1923c, Section X.] 

3 [Cf. the ‘Revolutionary’ dream, pp. 231 f. and 233 £] 

4 [Some amusing instances are given at the end of Section IV of Freud’s short es- 
say on dreams (1901a); Standard Ed., 5, 65 1 ■] 




340 


VI. The Dream-Work 


the formation of the composite structure in a dream is determined by a 
factor extraneous to its actual shape — namely the common element in the 
dream-thoughts. Composite structures in dreams can be formed in a great 
variety of ways. The most naive of these procedures merely represents the 
attributes of one thing to the accompaniment of a knowledge that they 
also belong to something else. A more painstaking technique combines the 
features of both objects into a new image and in so doing makes clever use 
of any similarities that the two objects may happen to possess in reality. 
The new structure may seem entirely absurd or may strike us as an imagi- 
native success, according to the material and to the ingenuity with which 
it is put together. If the objects which are to be condensed into a single 
unity are much too incongruous, the dream-work is often content with 
creating a composite structure with a comparatively distinct nucleus, ac- 
companied by a number of less distinct features. In that case the process 
of unification into a single image may be said to have failed. The two rep- 
resentations are superimposed and produce something in the nature of a 
contest between the two visual images. One might arrive at similar repre- 
sentations in a drawing, if one tried to illustrate the way in which a general 
concept is formed from a number of individual perceptual images. 

Dreams are, of course, a mass of these composite structures. I have 
given some examples of them in dreams that I have already analysed; and 
I will now add a few more. In the dream reported below on pp. 361 ff. 
[also above, p. 335], which describes the course of the patient’s life ‘in the 
language of flowers,’ the dream-ego held a blossoming branch in her hand 
which, as we have seen, stood both for innocence and for sexual sinfulness. 
The branch, owing to the way in which the blossoms were placed on it, 
also reminded the dreamer of cherry- blossom; the blossoms themselves, re- 
garded individually, were camellias, and moreover the general impression 
was of an exotic growth. The common factor among the elements of this 
composite structure was shown by the dream-thoughts. The blossoming 
branch was composed of allusions to gifts made to her in order to win, or 
attempt to win, her favour. Thus she had been given cherries in her child- 
hood and, later in life, a camellia- plant; while ‘exotic was an allusion to a 
much-travelled naturalist who had tried to win her favour with a flower- 
drawing. — Another of my women patients produced in one of her dreams 
a thing that was intermediate between a bathing-hut at the seaside, an out- 
side closet in the country and an attic in a town house. The first two ele- 
ments have in common a connection with people naked and undressed; 
and their combination with the third element leads to the conclusion that 



C. The Means of Representation 


341 


(in her childhood) an attic had also been a scene of undressing. — Another 
dreamer, 1 a man, produced a composite locality out of two places where 
‘treatments’ are carried out: one of them being my consulting-room and 
the other the place of entertainment where he had first made his wife’s ac- 
quaintance. — A girl dreamt, after her elder brother had promised to give 
her a feast of caviare, that this same brother’s legs were covered all over with 
black grains of caviare. The element of ‘ contagion (in the moral sense) and 
a recollection of a rash in her childhood, which had covered her legs all 
over with red spots, instead of black ones, had been combined with the 
grains of caviare into a new concept — namely the concept of ‘ what she had 
got from her brother .’ In this dream, as in others, parts of the human body 
were treated like objects. — In a dream recorded by Ferenczi [1910], 2 a 
composite image occurred which was made up from the figure of a doctor 
and of a horse and was also dressed in a nightshirt. The element common 
to these three components was arrived at in the analysis after the woman- 
patient had recognized that the nightshirt was an allusion to her father in 
a scene from her childhood. In all three cases it was a question of an object 
of her sexual curiosity. When she was a child she had often been taken by 
her nurse to a military stud-farm where she had ample opportunities of 
gratifying what was at that time her still uninhibited curiosity. 

I have asserted above [p. 334] that dreams have no means of expressing 
the relation of a contradiction, a contrary or a ‘no.’ I shall now proceed to 
give a first denial of this assertion. 3 One class of cases which can be com- 
prised under the heading of ‘contraries’ are, as we have seen [p. 338], sim- 
ply represented by identification — cases, that is, in which the idea of an 
exchange or substitution can be brought into connection with the contrast. 
I have given a number of instances of this. Another class of contraries in the 
dream-thoughts, falling into a category which may be described as ‘con- 
trariwise’ or ‘just the reverse,’ find their way into dreams in the following 
remarkable fashion, which almost deserves to be described as a joke. The 
‘just the reverse’ is not itself represented in the dream-content, but reveals 
its presence in the material through the fact that some piece of the dream- 
content, which has already been constructed and happens (for some other 
reason) to be adjacent to it, is — as it were by an afterthought — turned 


1 [This sentence was added in 1909.] 

2 [The remainder of this paragraph was added in 1911.] 

3 [Others will be found below on pp. 351 f. and 442 fi] 




342 


VI. The Dream-Work 


round the other way. The process is more easily illustrated than described. 
In the interesting ‘Up and Down’ dream (pp. 319 ff.) the representation of 
the climbing in the dream was the reverse of what it was in its prototype in 
the dream-thoughts — that is, in the introductory scene from Daudet’s Sap- 
pho-. in the dream the climbing was difficult at first but easier later, while in 
the Daudet scene it was easy at first but more and more difficult later. Fur- 
ther, the ‘up above’ and ‘down below’ in the dreamer’s relation to his 
brother were represented the other way round in the dream. This pointed 
to the presence of a reversed or contrary relation between two pieces of the 
material in the dream-thoughts; and we found it in the dreamer’s child- 
hood phantasy of being carried by his wet-nurse, which was the reverse of 
the situation in the novel, where the hero was carrying his mistress. So too 
in my dream of Goethe’s attack on Herr M. (see below, pp. 447 ff.) there is 
a similar ‘just the reverse’ which has to be put straight before the dream can 
be successfully interpreted. In the dream Goethe made an attack on a 
young man, Herr M.; in the real situation contained in the dream-thoughts 
a man of importance, my friend [Fliess], had been attacked by an unknown 
young writer. In the dream I based a calculation on the date of Goethe’s 
death; in reality the calculation had been made from the year of the para- 
lytic patient’s birth. The thought which turned out to be the decisive one 
in the dream-thoughts was a contradiction of the idea that Goethe should 
be treated as though he were a lunatic. ‘Just the reverse,’ said [the under- 
lying meaning of] the dream, ‘if you don’t understand the book, it’s you 
[the critic] that are feeble-minded, and not the author.’ I think, moreover, 
that all these dreams of turning things round the other way include a refer- 
ence to the contemptuous implications of the idea of ‘turning one’s back 
on something.’ 1 (E.g. the dreamer’s turning round in relation to his brother 
in the Sappho dream [pp. 305 f.].) It is remarkable to observe, moreover, 2 
how frequently reversal is employed precisely in dreams arising from re- 
pressed homosexual impulses. 

Incidentally, 3 reversal, or turning a thing into its opposite, is one of the 
means of representation most favoured by the dream-work and one which 
is capable of employment in the most diverse direction. It serves in the first 


1 [The German ‘ Kehrseite can mean both ‘reverse’ and ‘backside.’ Cf. the vulgar 
English phrase ‘arse upwards’ for ‘upside down,’ ‘the wrong way round.’] 

1 [This sentence was added in 1911.] 

3 [This and the next paragraph were added in 1909.] 




C. The Means of Representation 


343 


place to give expression to the fulfilment of a wish in reference to some 
particular element of the dream- thoughts. ‘If only it had been the other 
way round!’ This is often the best way of expressing the ego’s reaction to a 
disagreeable fragment of memory. Again, reversal is of quite special use as 
a help to the censorship, for it produces a mass of distortion in the material 
which is to be represented, and this has a positively paralysing effect, to be- 
gin with, on any attempt at understanding the dream. For that reason, if a 
dream obstinately declines to reveal its meaning, it is always worth while 
to see the effect of reversing some particular elements in its manifest con- 
tent, after which the whole situation often becomes immediately clear. 

And, apart from the reversal of subject-matter, chronological reversal 
must not be overlooked. Quite a common technique of dream-distortion 
consists in representing the outcome of an event or the conclusion of a 
train of thought at the beginning of a dream and of placing at its end the 
premises on which the conclusion was based or the causes which led to 
the event. Anyone who fails to bear in mind this technical method 
adopted by dream-distortion will be quite at a loss when confronted with 
the task of interpreting a dream . 1 

In some instances, indeed , 2 it is only possible to arrive at the meaning 
of a dream after one has carried out quite a number of reversals of its con- 
tent in various respects. For instance, in the case of a young obsessional 


1 [ Footnote added 1909:] Hysterical attacks sometimes make use of the same kind 
of chronological reversal in order to disguise their meaning from observers. For 
instance, a hysterical girl needed to represent something in the nature of a brief 
romance in one of her attacks — a romance of which she had had a phantasy in 
her unconscious after an encounter with someone on the suburban railway. She 
imagined how the man had been attracted by the beauty of her foot and had 
spoken to her while she was reading; whereupon she had gone off with him and 
had had a passionate love-scene. Her attack began with a representation of this 
love-scene by convulsive twitching of her body, accompanied by movements of 
her lips to represent kissing and tightening of her arms to represent embracing. 
She then hurried into the next room, sat down on a chair, raised her skirt so as 
to show her foot, pretended to be reading a book and spoke to me (that is, an- 
swered me ). — {Added 1914:] Cf. in this connection what Artemidorus says: ‘In 
interpreting the images seen in dreams one must sometimes follow them from 
the beginning to the end and sometimes from the end to the beginning. . .’ 
[Book I, Chapter XI, Krauss’s translation (1881), 20.] 

2 [This paragraph was added in 1911.] 




344 


VI. The Dream-Work 


neurotic, there lay concealed behind one of his dreams the memory of a 
death-wish dating from his childhood and directed against his father, of 
whom he had been afraid. Here is the text of the dream: His father was 
scolding him for coming home so late. The context in which the dream oc- 
curred in the psycho-analytic treatment and the dreamer’s associations 
showed, however, that the original wording must have been that he was 
angry with his father, and that in his view his father always came home 
too early (i.e. too soon). He would have preferred it if his father had not 
come home at all, and this was the same thing as a death-wish against his 
father. (See pp. 272 f.) For as a small boy, during his father’s temporary 
absence, he had been guilty of an act of sexual aggression against some- 
one, and as a punishment had been threatened in these words: ‘Just you 
wait till your father comes back!’ 

If we wish to pursue our study of the relations between dream-content 
and dream-thoughts further, the best plan will be to take dreams them- 
selves as our point of departure and consider what certain formal charac- 
teristics of the method of representation in dreams signify in relation to 
the thoughts underlying them. Most prominent among these formal 
characteristics, which cannot fail to impress us in dreams, are the differ- 
ences in sensory intensity between particular dream-images and in the 
distinctness of particular parts of dreams or of whole dreams as compared 
with one another. 

The differences in intensity between particular dream-images cover 
the whole range extending between a sharpness of definition which we 
feel inclined, no doubt unjustifiably, to regard as greater than that of re- 
ality and an irritating vagueness which we declare characteristic of dreams 
because it is not completely comparable to any degree of indistinctness 
which we ever perceive in real objects. Furthermore we usually describe 
an impression which we have of an indistinct object in a dream as ‘fleet- 
ing,’ while we feel that those dream-images which are more distinct have 
been perceived for a considerable length of time. The question now arises 
what it is in the material of the dream-thoughts that determines these dif- 
ferences in the vividness of particular pieces of the content of a dream. 

We must begin by countering certain expectations which almost in- 
evitably present themselves. Since the material of a dream may include real 
sensations experienced during sleep, it will probably be presumed that 
these, or the elements in the dream derived from them, are given promi- 



C. The Means of Representation 


345 


nence in the dream-content by appearing with special intensity; or, con- 
versely, that whatever is very specially vivid in a dream can be traced back 
to real sensations during sleep. In my experience, however, this has never 
been confirmed. It is not the case that the elements of a dream which are 
derivatives of real impressions during sleep (i.e. of nervous stimuli) are dis- 
tinguished by their vividness from other elements which arise from mem- 
ories. The factor of reality counts for nothing in determining the intensity 
of dream-images. 

Again, it might be expected that the sensory intensity (that is, the vivid- 
ness) of particular dream-images would be related to the psychical intensity 
of the elements in the dream-thoughts corresponding to them. In the latter, 
psychical intensity coincides with psychical value: the most intense ele- 
ments are also the most important ones — those which form the centre- 
point of the dream-thoughts. We know, it is true, that these are precisely 
elements which, on account of the censorship, cannot as a rule make their 
way into the content of the dream; nevertheless, it might well be that their 
immediate derivatives which represent them in the dream might bear a 
higher degree of intensity, without necessarily on that account forming the 
centre of the dream. But this expectation too is disappointed by a compar- 
ative study of dreams and the material from which they are derived. The 
intensity of the elements in the one has no relation to the intensity of the 
elements in the other: the fact is that a complete ‘transvaluation of all psy- 
chical values’ [in Nietzsche’s phrase] takes place between the material of the 
dream-thoughts and the dream. A direct derivative of what occupies a dom- 
inating position in the dream-thoughts can often only be discovered pre- 
cisely in some transitory element of the dream which is quite overshadowed 
by more powerful images. 

The intensity of the elements of a dream turns out to be determined 
otherwise — and by two independent factors. In the first place, it is easy 
to see that the elements by which the wish-fulfilment is expressed are rep- 
resented with special intensity. [See pp. 561 £] And in the second place, 
analysis shows that the most vivid elements of a dream are the starting- 
point of the most numerous trains of thought — that the most vivid ele- 
ments are also those with the most numerous determinants. We shall not 
be altering the sense of this empirically based assertion if we put it in 
these terms: the greatest intensity is shown by those elements of a dream 
on whose formation the greatest amount of condensation has been ex- 
pended. [Cf. pp. 592.] We may expect that it will eventually turn out to 



346 


VI. The Dream-Work 


be possible to express this determinant and the other (namely relation to 
the wish-fulhlment) in a single formula. 

The problem with which I have just dealt — the causes of the greater 
or less intensity or clarity of particular elements of a dream — is not to be 
confounded with another problem, which relates to the varying clarity of 
whole dreams or sections of dreams. In the former case clarity is con- 
trasted with vagueness, but in the latter case it is contrasted with confu- 
sion. Nevertheless it cannot be doubted that the increase and decrease of 
the qualities in the two scales run parallel. A section of a dream which 
strikes us as perspicuous usually contains intense elements; a dream which 
is obscure, on the other hand, is composed of elements of small intensity. 
Yet the problem presented by the scale which runs from what is appar- 
ently clear to what is obscure and confused is far more complicated than 
that of the varying degrees of vividness of dream-elements. Indeed, for 
reasons which will appear later, the former problem cannot yet be dis- 
cussed. [See pp. 504 £] 

In a few cases we find to our surprise that the impression of clarity or 
indistinctness given by a dream has no connection at all with the make- 
up of the dream itself but arises from the material of the dream-thoughts 
and is a constituent of it. Thus I remember a dream of mine which struck 
me when I woke up as being so particularly well-constructed, flawless and 
clear that, while I was still half-dazed with sleep, 1 thought of introducing 
a new category of dreams which were not subject to the mechanisms of 
condensation and displacement but were to be described as ‘phantasies 
during sleep.’ Closer examination proved that this rarity among dreams 
showed the same gaps and flaws in its structure as any other; and for that 
reason I dropped the category of ‘dream-phantasies.’ 1 The content of the 
dream, when it was arrived at, represented me as laying before my friend 
[Fliess] a difficult and long-sought theory of bisexuality; and the wish- 
fulfilling power of the dream was responsible for our regarding this theory 
(which, incidentally, was not given in the dream) as clear and flawless. 
Thus what I had taken to be a judgement on the completed dream was 
actually a part, and indeed the essential part, of the dream-content. The 
dream-work had in this case encroached, as it were, upon my first waking 


1 [ Footnote added 1930:] Whether rightly I am now uncertain. [Freud argues in 
favour of there being such a category in some remarks at the end of the discus- 
sion of his first example in his paper on ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (1922<j).] 




C. The Means of Representation 


347 


thoughts and had conveyed to me as a judgement upon the dream the part 
of the material of the dream-thoughts which it had not succeeded in rep- 
resenting accurately in the dream . 1 I once came across a precise counter- 
part to this in a woman-patient’s dream during analysis. To begin with 
she refused altogether to tell it me, ‘because it was so indistinct and mud- 
dled.’ At length, protesting repeatedly that she felt no certainty that her 
account was correct, she informed me that several people had come into 
the dream — she herself, her husband and her father — and that it was as 
though she had not known whether her husband was her father, or who 
her father was, or something of that sort. This dream, taken in conjunc- 
tion with her associations during the analytic session, showed beyond a 
doubt that it was a question of the somewhat commonplace story of a 
servant-girl who was obliged to confess that she was expecting a baby but 
was in doubts as to ‘who the (baby’s) father really was .’ 2 Thus here again 
the lack of clarity shown by the dream was a part of the material which 
instigated the dream: part of this material, that is, was represented in the 
form of the dream. The form of a dream or the form in which it is dreamt is 
used with quite surprising frequency for representing its concealed subject- 
matter? 

Glosses on a dream, or apparently innocent comments on it, often 
serve to disguise a portion of what has been dreamt in the subtlest fash- 
ion, though in fact betraying it. For instance, a dreamer remarked that at 
one point ‘the dream had been wiped away’; and the analysis led to an in- 
fantile recollection of his listening to someone wiping himself after defae- 
cating. Or here is another example which deserves to be recorded in 
detail. A young man had a very clear dream which reminded him of some 
phantasies of his boyhood that had remained conscious. He dreamt that 
it was evening and that he was in a hotel at a summer resort. He mistook 
the number of his room and went into one in which an elderly lady and 
her two daughters were undressing and going to bed. He proceeded: 
‘Here there are some gaps in the dream; there’s something missing. Fi- 
nally there was a man in the room who tried to throw me out, and I had 


1 [This subject is discussed much more fully below, on pp. 452 ff.] 

2 Her accompanying hysterical symptoms were amenorrhoea and great depression 
(which was this patient’s chief symptom). [This dream is discussed on pp. 453 
£] 

3 [The last sentence was added in 1909, and from 1914 onwards was printed in 
spaced type. The next paragraph was added in 1911.] 




348 


VI. The Dream-Work 


to have a struggle with him.’ He made vain endeavours to recall the gist 
and drift of the boyish phantasy to which the dream was evidently allud- 
ing; until at last the truth emerged that what he was in search of was al- 
ready in his possession in his remark about the obscure part of the dream. 
The ‘gaps’ were the genital apertures of the women who were going to 
bed; and ‘there’s something missing’ described the principal feature of the 
female genitalia. When he was young he had had a consuming curiosity 
to see a woman’s genitals and had been inclined to hold to the infantile 
sexual theory according to which women have male organs. 

An analogous recollection of another dreamer assumed a very similar 
shape. 1 He dreamt as follows: 7 was going into the Volksgarten Restaurant 
with Frdulein K ... . then came an obscure patch, an interruption . . . then 
I found myself in the salon of a brothel, where I saiv two or three ivomen, one 
of them in her chemise and drawers. ’ 

Analysis. — Fraulein K. was the daughter of his former chief, and, as 
he himself admitted, a substitute sister of his own. He had seldom had an 
opportunity of talking to her, but they once had a conversation in which 
‘it was just as though we had become aware of our sex, it was as though I 
were to say: “I’m a man and you’re a woman.’” He had only once been 
inside the restaurant in question, with his brother-in-law’s sister, a girl 
who meant nothing at all to him. Another time he had gone with a group 
of three ladies as far as the entrance of the same restaurant. These ladies 
were his sister, his sister-in-law and the brother-in-law’s sister who has 
just been mentioned. All of them were highly indifferent to him, but all 
three fell into the class of ‘sister.’ He had only seldom visited a brothel — 
only two or three times in his life. 

The interpretation was based on the ‘obscure patch’ and the ‘interrup- 
tion’ in the dream, and put forward the view that in his boyish curiosity 
he had occasionally, though only seldom, inspected the genitals of a sister 
who was a few years his junior. Some days later he had a conscious recol- 
lection of the misdeed alluded to by the dream. 

The content of all dreams that occur during the same night forms part 
of the same whole; the fact of their being divided into several sections, as 
well as the grouping and number of those sections — all of this has a 
meaning and may be regarded as a piece of information arising from the 


1 [This and the two following paragraphs were added in 1914.] 




C. The Means of Representation 


349 


latent dream- thoughts. 1 In interpreting dreams consisting of several main 
sections or, in general, dreams occurring during the same night, the pos- 
sibility should not be overlooked that separate and successive dreams of 
this kind may have the same meaning, and may be giving expression to 
the same impulses in different material. If so, the first of these homolo- 
gous dreams to occur is often the more distorted and timid, while the 
succeeding one will be more confident and distinct. 

Pharaoh’s dreams in the Bible of the kine and the ears of corn, which 
were interpreted by Joseph, were of this kind. They are reported more 
fully by Josephus ( Ancient History of the Jews , Book 2, Chapter 5) than in 
the Bible. After the King had related his first dream, he said: ‘After I had 
seen this vision, I awaked out of my sleep; and, being in disorder, and 
considering with myself what this appearance should be, I fell asleep 
again, and saw another dream, more wonderful than the foregoing, which 
did more affright and disturb me . . .’ After hearing the King’s account of 
the dream, Joseph replied: ‘This dream, O King, although seen under two 
forms, signifies one and the same event . . .’ [Whiston’s translation, 1874, 
1, 127-8.] 

In his ‘Contribution to the Psychology of Rumour,’ Jung (1910b), de- 
scribes how the disguised erotic dream of a school-girl was understood by 
her school-friends without any interpreting and how it was further elab- 
orated and modified. He remarks in connection with one of these dream 
stories: ‘The final thought in a long series of dream-images contains pre- 
cisely what the first image in the series had attempted to portray. The 
censorship keeps the complex at a distance as long as possible by a succes- 
sion of fresh symbolic screens, displacements, innocent disguises, etc.’ 
(Ibid., 87.) Schemer (1861, 166) was well acquainted with this peculiar- 
ity of the method of representation in dreams and describes it, in connec- 
tion with his theory of organic stimuli [see pp. Ill £], as a special law: 
‘Lastly, however, in all symbolic dream-structures which arise from par- 
ticular nervous stimuli, the imagination observes a general law: at the be- 
ginning of a dream it depicts the object from which the stimulus arises 
only by the remotest and most inexact allusions, but at the end, when the 


1 [This sentence was added in 1909. The remainder of this paragraph, and the 
three following ones, were added in 1911. Freud deals with the subject again to- 
wards the end of Lecture XXIX of his New Introductory Lectures (1933 a). It has 
already been touched upon on pp. 331 ff., and is mentioned again on p. 413, 
p. 452 n. and p. 528.] 




350 


VI. The Dream-Work 


pictorial effusion has exhausted itself, it nakedly presents the stimulus it- 
self, or, as the case may be, the organ concerned or the function of that 
organ, and therewith the dream, having designated its actual organic 
cause, achieves its end. 

Otto Rank (1910) has produced a neat confirmation of this law of 
Schemer’s. A girl’s dream reported by him was composed of two separate 
dreams dreamt, with an interval between them, during the same night, 
the second of which ended with an orgasm. It was possible to carry out a 
detailed interpretation of this second dream even without many contri- 
butions from the dreamer; and the number of connections between the 
contents of the two dreams made it possible to see that the first dream 
represented in a more timid fashion the same thing as the second. So that 
the second, the dream with the orgasm, helped towards the complete ex- 
planation of the first. Rank rightly bases upon this example a discussion 
of the general significance of dreams of orgasm or emission for the theory 
of dreaming. [See pp. 412 ffi] 

Nevertheless in my experience it is only rarely that one is in a position 
to interpret the clarity or confusion of a dream by the presence of cer- 
tainty or doubt in its material. Later on I shall have to disclose a factor in 
dream-formation which I have not yet mentioned and which exercises the 
determining influence upon the scale of these qualities in any particular 
dream. [See pp. 504 fi] 

Sometimes, in a dream in which the same situation and setting have 
persisted for some time, an interruption will occur which is described in 
these words: ‘But then it was as though at the same time it was another 
place, and there such and such a thing happened.’ After a while the main 
thread of the dream may be resumed, and what interrupted it turns out to 
be a subordinate clause in the dream-material — an interpolated thought. 
A conditional in the dream-thoughts has been represented in the dream by 
simultaneity: ‘if’ has become ‘when.’ 

What is the meaning of the sensation of inhibited movement which 
appears so commonly in dreams and verges so closely upon anxiety? One 
tries to move forward but finds oneself glued to the spot, or one tries to 
reach something but is held up by a series of obstacles. A train is on the 
point of departure but one is unable to catch it. One raises one’s hand to 



C. The Means of Representation 


351 


avenge an insult but finds it powerless. And so forth. We have already met 
with this sensation in dreams of exhibiting [pp. 256 ff.; cf. also p. 302], 
but have not as yet made any serious attempt to interpret it. An easy but 
insufficient answer would be to say that motor paralysis prevails in sleep 
and that we become aware of it in the sensation we are discussing. But it 
may be asked why in that case we are not perpetually dreaming of these 
inhibited movements; and it is reasonable to suppose that this sensation, 
though one which can be summoned up at any moment during sleep, 
serves to facilitate some particular kind of representation, and is only 
aroused when the material of the dream-thoughts needs to be represented 
in that way. 

This ‘not being able to do anything’ does not always appear in dreams 
as a sensation but is sometimes simply a part of the content of the dream. 
A case of this sort seems to me particularly well qualified to throw light 
on the meaning of this feature of dreaming. Here is an abridged version 
of a dream in which I was apparently charged with dishonesty. The place 
was a mixture of a private sanatorium and several other institutions. A man- 
servant appeared to summon me to an examination. I knew in the dream that 
something had been missed and that the examination was due to a suspicion 
that I had appropriated the missing article. (The analysis showed that the 
examination was to be taken in two senses and included a medical exam- 
ination.) Conscious of my innocence and of the fact that I held the position of 
a consultant in the establishment, I accompanied the servant quietly. At the 
door ive were met by another servant, who said, pointing to me: ‘Why have 
you brought him? He’s a respectable person. ’ I then went, unattended, into a 
large hall, with machines standing in it, which reminded me of an Inferno 
with its hellish instruments of punishment. Stretched out on one apparatus I 
saw one of my colleagues, who had every reason to take some notice of me; but 
he paid no attention. I was then told I coidd go. But I coidd not find my hat 
and coidd not go after all. 

The wish-fulfilment of the dream evidently lay in my being recognized 
as an honest man and told I could go. There must therefore have been all 
kinds of material in the dream-thoughts containing a contradiction of this. 
That I could go was a sign of my absolution. If therefore something hap- 
pened at the end of the dream which prevented my going, it seems plausi- 
ble to suppose that the suppressed material containing the contradiction 
was making itself felt at that point. My not being able to find my hat meant 
accordingly: ‘After all you’re not an honest man.’ Thus the ‘not being able 



352 


VI. The Dream-Work 


to do something’ in this dream was a way of expressing a contradiction — a 
‘no’ — so that my earlier statement [p. 334] that dreams cannot express a 
‘no’ requires correction. 1 

In other dreams, in which the ‘not carrying out’ of a movement occurs 
as a sensation and not simply as a situation, the sensation of the inhibition 
of a movement gives a more forcible expression to the same contradiction — 
it expresses a volition which is opposed by a counter-volition. Thus the 
sensation of the inhibition of a movement represents a conflict of will. [Cf. 
p. 264.] We shall learn later [pp. 567] that the motor paralysis accompa- 
nying sleep is precisely one of the fundamental determinants of the psy- 
chical process during dreaming. Now an impulse transmitted along the 
motor paths is nothing other than a volition, and the fact of our being so 
certain that we shall feel that impulse inhibited during sleep is what makes 
the whole process so admirably suited for representing an act of volition 
and a ‘no’ which opposes it. It is also easy to see, on my explanation of 
anxiety, why the sensation of an inhibition of will approximates so closely 
to anxiety and is so often linked with it in dreams. Anxiety is a libidinal 
impulse which has its origin in the unconscious and is inhibited by the 
preconscious. 2 When, therefore, the sensation of inhibition is linked with 
anxiety in a dream, it must be a question of an act of volition which was 
at one time capable of generating libido — that is, it must be a question of 
a sexual impulse. 


1 In the complete analysis there was a reference to an event in my childhood, 
reached by the following chain of association. 'Der Mohr hat seine Schuldigkeit 
getan, der Mohr kann gehen .’ [‘The Moor has done his duty, the Moor can go! 
(Schiller, Fiesco, III, 4.) 1 Schuldigkeit’ (‘duty’) is actually a misquotation for ‘Ar- 
beit’ (‘work’).] Then came a facetious conundrum: ‘How old was the Moor 
when he had done his duty?’ — ‘One year old, because then he could go 
[‘gehen — both ‘to go’ and 'to walk’] .’ (It appears that I came into the world with 
such a tangle of black hair that my young mother declared I was a little 
Moor.) — My not being able to find my hat was an occurrence from waking life 
which was used in more than one sense. Our housemaid, who was a genius at 
putting things away, had hidden it. — The end of this dream also concealed a re- 
jection of some melancholy thoughts about death: ‘I am far from having done 
my duty, so I must not go yet.’ — Birth and death were dealt with in it, just as 
they had been in the dream of Goethe and the paralytic patient, which I had 
dreamt a short time before. (See pp. 342, 447 ff. [and 456 ff.].) 

1 [ Footnote added 1930:] In the light of later knowledge this statement can no 
longer stand. [Cf. p. 185, n. 2. See also p. 503 n.\ 



D. Considerations of Representability 


353 


I shall deal elsewhere (see below [pp. 493 £]) with the meaning and 
psychical significance of the judgement which often turns up in dreams 
expressed in the phrase ‘after all this is only a dream.’ 1 Here I will merely 
say in anticipation that it is intended to detract from the importance of 
what is being dreamt. The interesting and allied problem, as to what is 
meant when some of the content of a dream is described in the dream it- 
self as ‘dreamt’ — the enigma of the ‘dream within a dream’ — has been 
solved in a similar sense by Stekel [1909, 459 f£], who has analysed some 
convincing examples. The intention is, once again, to detract from the 
importance of what is ‘dreamt’ in the dream, to rob it of its reality. What 
is dreamt in a dream after waking from the ‘dream within a dream’ is 
what the dream-wish seeks to put in the place of an obliterated reality. It 
is safe to suppose, therefore, that what has been ‘dreamt’ in the dream is 
a representation of the reality, the true recollection, while the continua- 
tion of the dream, on the contrary, merely represents what the dreamer 
wishes. To include something in a ‘dream within a dream’ is thus equiva- 
lent to wishing that the thing described as a dream had never happened. 
In other words, 2 if a particular event is inserted into a dream as a dream 
by the dream-work itself, this implies the most decided confirmation of 
the reality of the event — the strongest affirmation of it. The dream-work 
makes use of dreaming as a form of repudiation, and so confirms the dis- 
covery that dreams are wish-fulfilments. 3 


(D) 

CONSIDERATIONS OF REPRESENTABILITY 

We have been occupied so far with investigating the means by which 
dreams represent the relations between the dream-thoughts. In the course 
of this investigation, however, we have more than once touched upon the 
further topic of the general nature of the modifications which the material 


1 [This paragraph (except for its penultimate sentence and part of its last sentence) 
was added in 1911.] 

2 [This sentence was added in 1919.] 

3 [The last clause was added in 1919.] 




354 


VI. The Dream-Work 


of the dream-thoughts undergoes for the purpose of the formation of a 
dream. We have learnt that that material, stripped to a large extent of its 
relations, is submitted to a process of compression, while at the same time 
displacements of intensity between its elements necessarily bring about a 
psychical transvaluation of the material. The displacements we have hith- 
erto considered turned out to consist in the replacing of some one partic- 
ular idea by another in some way closely associated with it, and they were 
used to facilitate condensation in so far as, by their means, instead of two 
elements, a single common element intermediate between them found its 
way into the dream. We have not yet referred to any other sort of displace- 
ment. Analyses show us, however, that another sort exists and that it re- 
veals itself in a change in the verbal expression of the thoughts concerned. 
In both cases there is a displacement along a chain of associations; but a 
process of such a kind can occur in various psychical spheres, and the out- 
come of the displacement may in one case be that one element is replaced 
by another, while the outcome in another case may be that a single ele- 
ment has its verbal form replaced by another. 

This second species of displacement which occurs in dream-formation 
is not only of great theoretical interest but is also specially well calculated 
to explain the appearance of fantastic absurdity in which dreams are dis- 
guised. The direction taken by the displacement usually results in a colour- 
less and abstract expression in the dream-thought being exchanged for a 
pictorial and concrete one. The advantage, and accordingly the purpose, 
of such a change jumps to the eyes. A thing that is pictorial is, from the 
point of view of a dream, a thing that is capable of being represented-, it can 
be introduced into a situation in which abstract expressions offer the same 
kind of difficulties to representation in dreams as a political leading article 
in a newspaper would offer to an illustrator. But not only representability, 
but the interests of condensation and the censorship as well, can be the 
gainers from this exchange. A dream-thought is unusable so long as it is 
expressed in an abstract form; but when once it has been transformed into 
pictorial language, contrasts and identifications of the kind which the 
dream-work requires, and which it creates if they are not already present, 
can be established more easily than before between the new form of ex- 
pression and the remainder of the material underlying the dream. This is 
so because in every language concrete terms, in consequence of the history 
of their development, are richer in associations than conceptual ones. We 
may suppose that a good part of the intermediate work done during the 
formation of a dream, which seeks to reduce the dispersed dream-thoughts 



D. Considerations of Representability 


355 


to the most succinct and unified expression possible, proceeds along the 
line of finding appropriate verbal transformations for the individual 
thoughts. Any one thought, whose form of expression may happen to be 
fixed for other reasons, will operate in a determinant and selective manner 
on the possible forms of expression allotted to the other thoughts, and it 
may do so, perhaps, from the very start — as is the case in writing a poem. 
If a poem is to be written in rhymes, the second line of a couplet is limited 
by two conditions: it must express an appropriate meaning, and the ex- 
pression of that meaning must rhyme with the first line. No doubt the best 
poem will be one in which we fail to notice the intention of finding a 
rhyme, and in which the two thoughts have, by mutual influence, chosen 
from the very start a verbal expression which will allow a rhyme to emerge 
with only slight subsequent adjustment. 

In a few instances a change of expression of this kind assists dream- 
condensation even more directly, by finding a form of words which owing 
to its ambiguity is able to give expression to more than one of the dream- 
thoughts. In this way the whole domain of verbal wit is put at the disposal 
of the dream-work. There is no need to be astonished at the part played by 
words in dream-formation. Words, since they are the nodal points of nu- 
merous ideas, may be regarded as predestined to ambiguity; and the neu- 
roses (e.g. in framing obsessions and phobias), no less than dreams, make 
unashamed use of the advantages thus offered by words for purposes of 
condensation and disguise . 1 It is easy to show that dream-distortion too 
profits from displacement of expression. If one ambiguous word is used 
instead of two unambiguous ones the result is misleading; and if our every- 
day, sober method of expression is replaced by a pictorial one, our under- 
standing is brought to a halt, particularly since a dream never tells us 
whether its elements are to be interpreted literally or in a figurative sense or 
whether they are to be connected with the material of the dream-thoughts 
directly or through the intermediary of some interpolated phraseology . 2 In 
interpreting any dream-element it is in general doubtful 


1 [ Footnote added 1 909:] See my volume on jokes ( 1 905c) [especially the later part 
of Chapter VI] and the use of Verbal bridges’ in the solution of neurotic symp- 
toms. [See, e.g., the synthesis of Dora’s first dream at the end of Section II of 
Freud, 1905c (where the term ‘switch-words’ is also used), and the solution of 
the ‘Rat Man’s’ rat-obsession in Section 1(G) of Freud, 1909 d.] 

2 [The remainder of this paragraph was added as a footnote in 1 909 and included 
in the text in 1914.] 



356 


VI. The Dream-Work 


(, a ) whether it is to be taken in a positive or negative sense (as an an- 
tithetic relation), 

(b) whether it is to be interpreted historically (as a recollection), 

(c) whether it is to be interpreted symbolically, or 

(, d ) whether its interpretation is to depend on its wording. Yet, in 
spite of all this ambiguity, it is fair to say that the productions of the 
dream-work, which, it must be remembered, are not made with the inten- 
tion of being understood , present no greater difficulties to their translators 
than do the ancient hieroglyphic scripts to those who seek to read them. 

I have already given several examples of representations in dreams which 
are only held together by the ambiguity of their wording. (For instance, 
‘She opened her mouth properly’ in the dream of Irma’s injection [p. 135] 
and ‘I could not go after all’ in the dream which I last quoted [pp. 351].) I 
will now record a dream in which a considerable part was played by the 
turning of abstract thought into pictures. The distinction between dream- 
interpretation of this kind and interpretation by means of symbolism can 
still be drawn quite sharply. In the case of symbolic dream-interpretation 
the key to the symbolization is arbitrarily chosen by the interpreter; whereas 
in our cases of verbal disguise the keys are generally known and laid down 
by firmly established linguistic usage. If one has the right idea at one’s dis- 
posal at the right moment, one can solve dreams of this kind wholly or in 
part even independently of information from the dreamer. 

A lady of my acquaintance had the following dream: She was at the 
Opera. A Wagner opera was being performed, and had lasted till a quarter to 
eight in the morning. There were tables set out in the stalls, at which people 
were eating and drinking. Her cousin, who had just got back from his honey- 
moon, ivas sitting at one of the tables with his young wife, and an aristocrat 
was sitting beside them. Her cousin s wife, so it appeared, had brought him 
back with her from the honeymoon, quite openly, just as one might bring back 
a hat. In the middle of the stalls there was a high tower, which had a plaform 
on top of it surrounded by an iron railing. High up at the top was the con- 
ductor, who had the features of Hans Richter. He kept running round the rail- 
ing, and was perspiring violently; and from that position he ivas conducting 
the orchestra, ivhich ivas grouped about the base of the tower She herself was 
sitting in a box ivith a woman friend (whom 1 knew). Her younger sister 
wanted to hand her up a large lump of coal from the stalls, on the ground that 
she had not known it would be so long, and must be simply freezing by now. 
(As though the boxes required to be heated during the long performance.) 



D. Considerations of Representability 


357 


Even though the dream was well focused on a single situation, yet in 
other respects it was sufficiently senseless: the tower in the middle of the 
stalls, for instance, with the conductor directing the orchestra from the 
top of it! And above all the coal that her sister handed up to her! I delib- 
erately refrained from asking for an analysis of the dream. But since I had 
some knowledge of the dreamer’s personal relations, I was able to inter- 
pret certain pieces of it independently of her. I know she had had a great 
deal of sympathy for a musician whose career had been prematurely cut 
short by insanity. So I decided to take the tower in the stalls metaphori- 
cally. It then emerged that the man whom she had wanted to see in Hans 
Richter’s place towered high above the other members of the orchestra. 
The tower might be described as a composite picture formed by apposi- 
tion. The lower part of its structure represented the man’s greatness; the 
railing at the top, behind which he was running round like a prisoner or 
an animal in a cage — this was an allusion to the unhappy man’s name 1 — 
represented his ultimate fate. The two ideas might have been brought to- 
gether in the word ‘ Narrenturm.’ 2 

Having thus discovered the mode of representation adopted by the 
dream, we might attempt to use the same key for solving its second ap- 
parent absurdity — the coal handed up to the dreamer by her sister. ‘Coal’ 
must mean ‘secret love’: 

Kein Feuer, keine Kohle 
kann brennen so heiss 
als wie heimliche Liebe , 
von der niemand nichts weiss . 3 

She herself and her woman friend had been left unmarried [German 
‘ sitzen geblieben,’ literally ‘left sitting’]. Her younger sister, who still had 
prospects of marriage, handed her up the coal ‘because she had not 
known it woidd be so long.’ The dream did not specify what would be so 


1 [Footnote added 1925:] Hugo Wolf. 

2 [Literally ‘Fools’ Tower’ — an old term for an insane asylum.] 

3 [No fire, no coal 
So hotly glows 
As secret love 
Of which no one knows. 

German Volkslied. ] 



358 


VI. The Dream-Work 


long. If it were a story, we should say ‘the performance’; but since it is a 
dream, we may take the phrase as an independent entity, decide that it 
was used ambiguously and add the words ‘before she got married.’ Our 
interpretation of ‘secret love’ is further supported by the mention of the 
dreamer’s cousin sitting with his wife in the stalls, and by the open love- 
affair attributed to the latter. The dream was dominated by the antithesis 
between secret and open love and between the dreamer’s own fire and the 
coldness of the young wife. In both cases, moreover, there was someone 
‘highly-placed’ — a term applying equally to the aristocrat and to the mu- 
sician on whom such high hopes had been pinned. 1 

The foregoing discussion has led us at last to the discovery of a third 
factor 2 whose share in the transformation of the dream-thoughts into the 
dream-content is not to be underrated; namely, considerations ofrepre- 
sentability in the peculiar psychical material of which dreams make use — for 
the most part, that is, representability in visual images. Of the various 
subsidiary thoughts attached to the essential dream-thoughts, those will 
be preferred which admit of visual representation; and the dream-work 
does not shrink from the effort of recasting unadaptable thoughts into a 
new verbal form — even into a less usual one — provided that that process 
facilitates representation and so relieves the psychological pressure caused 
by constricted thinking. This pouring of the content of a thought into 
another mould may at the same time serve the purposes of the activity of 
condensation and may create connections, which might not otherwise 
have been present, with some other thought; while this second thought 
itself may already have had its original form of expression changed, with 
a view to meeting the first one half-way. 

Herbert Silberer (1909) 3 has pointed out a good way of directly observ- 
ing the transformation of thoughts into pictures in the process of forming 
dreams and so of studying this one factor of the dream-work in isolation. 
If, when he was in a fatigued and sleepy condition, he set himself some in- 
tellectual task, he found that it often happened that the thought escaped 
him and that in its place a picture appeared, which he was then able to rec- 
ognize as a substitute for the thought. Silberer describes these substitutes 


1 [The element of absurdity in this dream is commented upon on p. 444.] 

2 [The two previous ones being condensation and displacement.] 

3 [This paragraph and the subsequent quotation from Silberer were added in 1914.] 




D. Considerations of Representability 359 

by the not very appropriate term of ‘auto-symbolic.’ I will here quote a few 
examples from Silberer’s paper [ibid., 519-22], and I shall have occasion, 
on account of certain characteristics of the phenomena concerned, to re- 
turn to them later. [See pp. 507 ff.] 

‘ Example 1 . — I thought of having to revise an uneven passage in an 
essay. 

‘ Symbol . — I saw myself planing a piece of wood.’ 

‘ Example 5. — I endeavoured to bring home to myself the aim of certain 
metaphysical studies which I was proposing to make. Their aim, 1 re- 
flected, was to work one’s way through to ever higher forms of conscious- 
ness and layers of existence, in one’s search for the bases of existence. 

‘ Symbol . — I was pushing a long knife under a cake, as though to lift 
out a slice. 

‘ Interpretation . — My motion with the knife meant the “working my 
way through” which was in question. . . . Here is the explanation of the 
symbolism. It is from time to time my business at meals to cut up a cake 
and distribute the helpings. I perform the task with a long, flexible 
knife — which demands some care. In particular, to lift out the slices 
cleanly after they have been cut offers certain difficulties; the knife must 
be pushed carefully under the slice (corresponding to the slow “working 
my way through” to reach the “bases”). But there is yet more symbolism 
in the picture. For the cake in the symbol was a “Dobos” cake — a cake 
with a number of “layers” through which, in cutting it, the knife has to 
penetrate (the “layers” of consciousness and thought).’ 

‘Example 9. — I had lost the thread in a train of thought. I tried to find it 
again, but had to admit that the starting-point had completely escaped me. 

1 Symbol . — Part of a compositor’s forme, with the last lines of type 
fallen away.’ 

In view of the part played by jokes, quotations, songs and proverbs in 
the mental life of educated people, it would fully agree with our expecta- 
tions if disguises of such kinds were used with extreme frequency for repre- 
senting dream-thoughts. What, for instance, is the meaning in a dream of 
a number of carts, each filled with a different sort of vegetable? They stand 
for a wishful contrast to ‘ Kraut und Riiberi [literally, ‘cabbages and tur- 
nips’], that is to say to ‘higgledy-piggledy,’ and accordingly signify ‘dis- 
order.’ I am surprised that this dream has only been reported to me once. 1 


[ Footnote added 1925:] I have in fact never met with this image again; so I have 
lost confidence in the correctness of the interpretation. 




360 


VI. The Dream-Work 


A dream-symbolism of universal validity has only emerged in the case of a 
few subjects, on the basis of generally familiar allusions and verbal substi- 
tutes. Moreover a good part of this symbolism is shared by dreams with 
psychoneuroses, legends and popular customs. 1 

Indeed, when we look into the matter more closely, we must recognize 
the fact that the dream-work is doing nothing original in making substi- 
tutions of this kind. In order to gain its ends — in this case the possibility 
of a representation unhampered by censorship — it merely follows the 
paths which it finds already laid down in the unconscious; and it gives 
preference to those transformations of the repressed material which can 
also become conscious in the form of jokes or allusions and of which the 
phantasies of neurotic patients are so full. At this point we suddenly reach 
an understanding of Schemer’s dream-interpretations, whose essential cor- 
rectness I have defended elsewhere [pp. 109 ff. and 247]. The imagina- 
tion’s pre-occupation with the subject’s own body is by no means peculiar 
to dreams or characteristic only of them. My analyses have shown me that 
it is habitually present in the unconscious thoughts of neurotics, and that 
it is derived from sexual curiosity, which, in growing youths or girls, is di- 
rected to the genitals of the other sex, and to those of their own as well. 
Nor, as Schemer [1861] and Volkelt [1875] have rightly insisted, is a 
house the only circle of ideas employed for symbolizing the body; and this 
is equally true of dreams and of the unconscious phantasies of neurosis. It 
is true that I know patients who have retained an architectural symbolism 
for the body and the genitals. (Sexual interest ranges far beyond the sphere 
of the external genitalia.) For these patients pillars and columns represent 
the legs (as they do in the Song of Solomon), every gateway stands for one 
of the bodily orifices (a ‘hole’), every water-pipe is a reminder of the uri- 
nary apparatus, and so on. But the circle of ideas centring round plant-life 
or the kitchen may just as readily be chosen to conceal sexual images. 2 In 
the former case the way has been well prepared by linguistic usage, itself 
the precipitate of imaginative similes reaching back to remote antiquity: 
e.g. the Lord’s vineyard, the seed, and the maiden’s garden in the Song of 
Solomon. The ugliest as well as the most intimate details of sexual life may 
be thought and dreamt of in seemingly innocent allusions to activities in 
the kitchen; and the symptoms of hysteria could never be interpreted if we 


1 [The subject of dream-symbolism is treated at length in the next section.] 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] Abundant evidence of this is to be found in the three 
supplementary volumes to Fuchs (1909-12). 




D. Considerations of Representability 


361 


forgot that sexual symbolism can find its best hiding-place behind what is 
commonplace and inconspicuous. There is a valid sexual meaning behind 
the neurotic child’s intolerance of blood or raw meat, or his nausea at the 
sight of eggs or macaroni, and behind the enormous exaggeration in neu- 
rotics of the natural human dread of snakes. Wherever neuroses make use 
of such disguises they are following paths along which all humanity passed 
in the earliest periods of civilization — paths of whose continued existence 
today, under the thinnest of veils, evidence is to be found in linguistic us- 
ages, superstitions and customs. 

I will now append the ‘flowery’ dream dreamt by one of my women 
patients which I have already [p. 331] promised to record. I have indi- 
cated in small capitals those elements in it that are to be given a sexual in- 
terpretation. The dreamer quite lost her liking for this pretty dream after 
it had been interpreted. 

(a) Introductory Dream: She went into the kitchen, where her tivo 
maidservants ivere, and found faidt with them for not having got her ‘bite of 
food’ ready. At the same time she saw quite a quantity of crockery standing 
upside down to drain, common crockery piled up in heaps. Later addition: 
The two maidservants ivent to fetch some water and had to step into a kind 
of river which came right up to the house into the yard} 

(i b ) Main Dream 1 2 : She was descending from a height 3 over some strangely 
constructed palisades or fences, which were put together into large panels, and 
consisted of small squares of wattling . 4 5 It was not intended for climbing over; 
she had trouble in finding a place to put her feet in and felt glad that her dress 
had not been caught anywhere, so that she had stayed respectable as she went 
along } She was holding a big branch in her hand 6 ; actually it was like a 
tree, covered over ivith red blossoms, branching and spreading out. 7 There 


1 For the interpretation of this introductory dream, which is to be interpreted as a 
causal dependent clause, see p. 331. [Cf. also pp. 335 and 340.] 

2 Describing the course of her life. 

3 Her high descent: a wishful antithesis to the introductory dream. 

4 A composite picture, uniting two localities: what were known as the ‘attics’ of 
her family home, where she used to play with her brother, the object of her later 
phantasies, and a farm belonging to a bad uncle who used to tease her. 

5 A wishful antithesis to a real recollection of her uncle’s farm, where she used to 
throw off her clothes in her sleep. 

s Just as the angel carries a sprig of lilies in pictures of the Annunciation. 

7 For the explanation of this composite image see p. 354: innocence, menstrua- 
tion, La dame aux camelias. 




362 


VI. The Dream-Work 


was an idea of their being cherry-ntossoM; but they also looked like double 
camellias, though of course those do not grow on trees. As she went doivn, 
first she had one, then suddenly two, and later again one . 1 When she got 
down, the lower blossoms were already a good deal faded. Then she saw, 
after she had got down, a manservant ivho — she felt inclined to say — was 
combing a similar tree, that is to say he ivas using a piece of wood to drag 
out some thick tufts of hair that were hanging down from it like moss. 
Some other ivorkmen had cut down similar branches from a garden and 
thrown them into the road, where they lay about, so that a. lot of people 
took some. But she asked whether that was all right — whether she might 
take one too . 2 A young man (someone she knew, a stranger) was standing 
in the garden; she ivent up to him to ask hoiv branches of that kind could 
be transplanted into her own garden . 3 4 He embraced her; whereupon 
she struggled and asked him what he was thinking of and whether he thought 
people could embrace her like that. He said there ivas no harm in that: it was 
alloivedd He then said he ivas willing to go into the other garden with her, 
to show her how the planting was done, and added something she could not 
quite understand: Anyhow , I need three yards (later she gave it as: three 
square yards) or three fathoms of ground. ’It was as though he were asking her 
for something in return for his willingness, as though he intended to com- 
pensate himself in her garden, or as though he wanted to cheat some law 
or other, to get some advantage from it without causing her harm. Whether 
he really showed her something, she had no idea. 

This dream, which I have brought forward on account of its symbolic 
elements, may be described as a ‘biographical’ one. Dreams of this kind oc- 
cur frequently during psycho-analysis, but perhaps only rarely outside it . 5 


1 Referring to the multiplicity of the people involved in her phantasy. 

1 That is whether she might pull one down, i.e. masturbate. [‘Sich einen herunter- 
reissen or ‘ausreissen (literally, ‘to pull one down’ or ‘out’) are vulgar German 
terms equivalent to the English ‘to toss oneself off.’ Freud had already drawn at- 
tention to this symbolism at the end of his paper on ‘Screen Memories’ (1899a); 
see also below, pp. 400 f.] 

3 The branch had long since come to stand for the male genital organ; incidentally 
it also made a plain allusion to her family name. 

4 This, as well as what next follows, related to marriage precautions. 

5 [This paragraph was added in 1925 . — Footnote added (to the preceding para- 
graph) 1911:] A similar ‘biographical’ dream will be found below as the third of 
my examples of dream-symbolism [p. 377.] Another one has been recorded at 
length by Rank [1910], and another, which must be read ‘in reverse,’ by Stekel 



E. Representation by Symbols 


363 


I naturally have at my disposal 1 a superfluity of material of this kind, 
but to report it would involve us too deeply in a consideration of neurotic 
conditions. It all leads to the same conclusion, namely that there is no ne- 
cessity to assume that any peculiar symbolizing activity of the mind is 
operating in the dream-work, but that dreams make use of any symboliza- 
tions which are already present in unconscious thinking, because they fit 
in better with the requirements of dream-construction on account of their 
representability and also because as a rule they escape censorship. 


(E) 

REPRESENTATION BY SYMBOLS IN 
DREAMS— SOME FURTHER TYPICAL DREAMS 2 

The analysis of this last, biographical, dream is clear evidence that 1 
recognized the presence of symbolism in dreams from the very beginning. 
But it was only by degrees and as my experience increased that I arrived 


(1909, 486). — [A reference to ‘biographical’ dreams will be found near the end 
of Freud’s ‘History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’ (191 4</).] 

1 [In the first three editions, 1900, 1909 and 1911, this paragraph was preceded by 
another, which was omitted from 1914 onwards. The deleted paragraph ran as fol- 
lows: ‘I must mention another circle of ideas which often serves as a disguise for 
sexual material both in dreams and in neuroses: namely ideas connected with 
changing house. “Changing house” may easily be replaced by the word 
“Ausziehen” [meaning both “moving house” and “undressing,”] and is thus con- 
nected with the subject of “clothing.” If there is also a lift or elevator in the dream, 
we shall be reminded of the English word “to lift,” that is, “to lift one’s clothes.’”] 

2 [With the exception of two paragraphs (on p. 404) none of Section E of this 
chapter appeared in the first edition of the book. As explained in the Editor’s In- 
troduction (p. xiii), much of the material was added in the 1909 and 1911 edi- 
tions, but in them it was included in Chapter V under the heading of ‘Typical 
Dreams’ (Section D of that chapter). In the edition of 1914 the present section 
was first constituted, partly from the material previously added to Chapter V 
and partly from further new material. Still more material was added in subse- 
quent editions. In view of these complications, in this section a date has been 
added in square brackets at the end of each paragraph. It will be understood 
from what has been said that material dated 1909 and 1911 originally appeared 
in ChapterV and was transferred to its present position in 1914.] 




364 


VI. The Dream-Work 


at a full appreciation of its extent and significance, and I did so under the 
influence of the contributions of Wilhelm Stekel (1911), about whom a 
few words will not be out of place here. [1925.] 

That writer, who has perhaps damaged psycho-analysis as much as he 
has benefited it, brought forward a large number of unsuspected transla- 
tions of symbols; to begin with they were met with scepticism, but later 
they were for the most part confirmed and had to be accepted. I shall not 
be belittling the value of Stekel’s services if I add that the sceptical reserve 
with which his proposals were received was not without justification. For 
the examples by which he supported his interpretations were often uncon- 
vincing, and he made use of a method which must be rejected as scientifi- 
cally untrustworthy. Stekel arrived at his interpretations of symbols by way 
of intuition, thanks to a peculiar gift for the direct understanding of them. 
But the existence of such a gift cannot be counted upon generally, its ef- 
fectiveness is exempt from all criticism and consequently its findings have 
no claim to credibility. It is as though one sought to base the diagnosis of 
infectious diseases upon olfactory impressions received at the patient’s 
bedside — though there have undoubtedly been clinicians who could ac- 
complish more than other people by means of the sense of smell (which is 
usually atrophied) and were really able to diagnose a case of enteric fever 
by smell. [1925.] 

Advances in psycho-analytic experience have brought to our notice pa- 
tients who have shown a direct understanding of dream-symbolism of 
this kind to a surprising extent. They were often sufferers from dementia 
praecox, so that for a time there was an inclination to suspect every 
dreamer who had this grasp of symbols of being a victim of that disease. 1 
But such is not the case. It is a question of a personal gift or peculiarity 
which has no visible pathological significance. [1925.] 

When we have become familiar with the abundant use made of sym- 
bolism for representing sexual material in dreams, the question is bound 
to arise of whether many of these symbols do not occur with a perma- 
nently fixed meaning, like the ‘grammalogues’ in shorthand; and we shall 
feel tempted to draw up a new ‘dream-book’ on the decoding principle 
[see pp. 123 £]. On that point there is this to be said: this symbolism is 
not peculiar to dreams, but is characteristic of unconscious ideation, in 


1 [Freud remarks elsewhere (1913a) that, just as the presence of dementia praecox 
facilitates the interpretation of symbols, so an obsessional neurosis makes it more 
difficult.] 




E. Representation by Symbols 


365 


particular among the people, and it is to be found in folklore, and in pop- 
ular myths, legends, linguistic idioms, proverbial wisdom and current 
jokes, to a more complete extent than in dreams. [1909.] 

It would therefore carry us far beyond the sphere of dream-interpretation 
if we were to do justice to the significance of symbols and discuss the nu- 
merous, and to a large extent still unsolved, problems attaching to the con- 
cept of a symbol. 1 We must restrict ourselves here to remarking that 
representation by a symbol is among the indirect methods of representa- 
tion, but that all kinds of indications warn us against lumping it in with 
other forms of indirect representation without being able to form any clear 
conceptual picture of their distinguishing features. In a number of cases 
the element in common between a symbol and what it represents is obvi- 
ous; in others it is concealed and the choice of the symbol seems puzzling. 
It is precisely these latter cases which must be able to throw light upon the 
ultimate meaning of the symbolic relation, and they indicate that it is of a 
genetic character. Things that are symbolically connected today were prob- 
ably united in the prehistoric times by conceptual and linguistic identity. 2 
The symbolic relation seems to be a relic and a mark of former identity. In 
this connection we may observe how in a number of cases the use of a 
common symbol extends further than the use of a common language, as 
was already pointed out by Schubert (1814). 3 A number of symbols are as 
old as language itself, while others (e.g. ‘airship,’ ‘Zeppelin’) are being 
coined continuously down to the present time. [1914.] 


1 [ Footnote 1911:] Cf. the works of Bleuler [1910] and of his Zurich pupils, 
Maeder [1908], Abraham [1909], etc., on symbolism, and the non-medical 
writers to whom they refer (Kleinpaul, etc.). [ Added 1914:] What is most to the 
point on this subject will be found in Rank and Sachs (1913, Chapter I). [Added 
1925:] See further Jones (1916). 

2 [ Footnote added 1925:] This view would be powerfully supported by a theory put 
forward by Dr. Hans Sperber (1912). He is of the opinion that all primal words 
referred to sexual things but afterwards lost their sexual meaning through being 
applied to other things and activities which were compared with the sexual ones. 

3 [This last clause was added in 1919 . — Footnote 1914:] For instance, according to 
Ferenczi [see Rank, 1912a, 100], a ship moving on the water occurs in dreams of 
micturition in Hungarian dreamers, though the term ‘ schifferi ['to ship’; cf. vulgar 
English ‘to pump-ship’] is unknown in that language. (See also pp. 380 below.) 
In dreams of speakers of French and other Romance languages a room is used to 
symbolize a woman, though these languages have nothing akin to the German 
expression ‘ Frauenzimmer! [See p. 235 n.] 




366 


VI. The Dream-Work 


Dreams make use of this symbolism for the disguised representation 
of their latent thoughts. Incidentally, many of the symbols are habitually 
or almost habitually employed to express the same thing. Nevertheless, 
the peculiar plasticity of the psychical material [in dreams] must never be 
forgotten. Often enough a symbol has to be interpreted in its proper 
meaning and not symbolically; while on other occasions a dreamer may 
derive from his private memories the power to employ as sexual symbols 
all kinds of things which are not ordinarily employed as such. 1 If a 
dreamer has a choice open to him between a number of symbols, he will 
decide in favour of the one which is connected in its subject-matter with 
the rest of the material of his thoughts — which, that is to say, has individ- 
ual grounds for its acceptance in addition to the typical ones. [1909; last 
sentence 1914.] 

Though the later investigations since the time of Schemer have made 
it impossible to dispute the existence of dream-symbolism — even Have- 
lock Ellis [191 1, 109] admits that there can be no doubt that our dreams 
are full of symbolism — yet it must be confessed that the presence of sym- 
bols in dreams not only facilitates their interpretation but also makes it 
more difficult. As a rule the technique of interpreting according to the 
dreamer’s free associations leaves us in the lurch when we come to the 
symbolic elements in the dream-content. Regard for scientific criticism 
forbids our returning to the arbitrary judgement of the dream-interpreter, 
as it was employed in ancient times and seems to have been revived in the 
reckless interpretations of Stekel. We are thus obliged, in dealing with 
those elements of the dream-content which must be recognized as sym- 
bolic, to adopt a combined technique, which on the one hand rests on the 
dreamer’s associations and on the other hand fills the gaps from the inter- 
preter’s knowledge of symbols. We must combine a critical caution in re- 
solving symbols with a careful study of them in dreams which afford 
particularly clear instances of their use, in order to disarm any charge of 
arbitrariness in dream-interpretation. The uncertainties which still attach 
to our activities as interpreters of dreams spring in part from our incom- 
plete knowledge, which can be progressively improved as we advanced fur- 
ther, but in part from certain characteristics of dream-symbols themselves. 
They frequently have more than one or even several meanings, and, as 


1 [In the editions of 1909 and 1911 only, the following sentence appeared at 
this point: ‘Moreover the ordinarily used sexual symbols are not invariably 
unambiguous.’] 




E. Representation by Symbols 


367 


with Chinese script, the correct interpretation can only be arrived at on 
each occasion from the context. This ambiguity of the symbols links up 
with the characteristic of dreams for admitting of ‘over-interpretation’ [see 
p. 313] — for representing in a single piece of content thoughts and wishes 
which are often widely divergent in their nature. [1914.] 

Subject to these qualifications and reservations I will now proceed. The 
Emperor and Empress (or the King and Queen) as a rule really represent 
the dreamer’s parents; and a Prince or Princess represents the dreamer 
himself or herself. [1909.] But the same high authority is attributed to 
great men as to the Emperor; and for that reason Goethe, for instance, ap- 
pears as a father-symbol in some dreams (Hitschmann, 1913.) [1919.] — 
All elongated objects, such as sticks, tree-trunks and umbrellas (the 
opening of these last being comparable to an erection) may stand for the 
male organ [1909] — as well as all long, sharp weapons, such as knives, 
daggers and pikes [191 1]. Another frequent though not entirely intelligi- 
ble symbol of the same thing is a nail-file — possibly on account of the rub- 
bing up and down. [1909.] — Boxes, cases, chests, cupboards and ovens 
represent the uterus [1909], and also hollow objects, ships, and vessels of 
all kinds [1919]. — Rooms in dreams are usually women (‘ Fmuenzimmer 
[see p. 235 ».]); if the various ways in and out of them are represented, this 
interpretation is scarcely open to doubt. [1909. ]' In this connection inter- 
est in whether the room is open or locked is easily intelligible. (Cf. Dora’s 
first dream in my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria,’ 1905e 
[Footnote near the beginning of Section II] .) There is no need to name ex- 
plicitly the key that unlocks the room; in his ballad of Count Eberstein, 
Uhland has used the symbolism of locks and keys to construct a charming 
piece of bawdry. [1911.] — A dream of going through a suite of rooms is a 


! [Footnote added 1919:] ‘One of my patients, who was living in a boarding-house, 
dreamt that he met one of the maidservants and asked her what her number was. 
To his surprise she answered'. “14”. He had in fact started a liaison with this girl 
and had paid several visits to her in her bedroom. She had not unnaturally been 
afraid that the landlady might become suspicious, and, on the day before the 
dream, she had proposed that they should meet in an unoccupied room. This 
room was actually “No. 14,” while in the dream it was the woman herself who 
bore this number. It would hardly be possible to imagine clearer proof of an 
identification between a woman and a room.’ (Jones, 1914a.) Cf. Artemidorus, 
Oneirocritica , Book II, Chapter X: ‘Thus, for instance, a bedchamber stands for 
a wife, if such there be in the house.’ (Trans. F. S. Krauss, 1881, 110.) 




368 


VI. The Dream-Work 


brothel or harem dream. [1909.] But, as Sachs [1914] has shown by some 
neat examples, it can also be used (by antithesis) to represent marriage. 
[1914.] — We find an interesting link with the sexual researches of child- 
hood when a dreamer dreams of two rooms which were originally one, or 
when he sees a familiar room divided into two in the dream, or vice versa. 
In childhood the female genitals and the anus are regarded as a single 
area — the ‘bottom’ (in accordance with the infantile ‘cloaca theory’) 1 ; and 
it is not until later that the discovery is made that this region of the body 
comprises two separate cavities and orifices. [1919.] — Steps, ladders or 
staircases, or, as the case may be, walking up or down them, are represen- 
tations of the sexual act. 2 — Smooth walls over which the dreamer climbs, 
the facades of houses, down which he lowers himself — often in great 
anxiety — correspond to erect human bodies, and are probably repeating in 
the dream recollections of a baby’s climbing up his parents or nurse. The 
‘smooth’ walls are men; in his fear the dreamer often clutches hold of ‘pro- 
jections’ in the facades of houses. [1911.] — Tables, tables laid for a meal, 
and boards also stand for women — no doubt by antithesis, since the con- 
tours of their bodies are eliminated in the symbols. [1909.] ‘Wood’ seems, 
from its linguistic connections, to stand in general for female ‘material.’ 
The name of the Island of ‘Madeira’ means ‘wood’ in Portuguese [1911.] 


1 [See the section on ‘Theories of Birth’ in the second of Freud’s Three Essays on 
the Theory of Sexuality (1905^).] 

1 [ Footnote 1911:] I will repeat here what I have written on this subject elsewhere 
(Freud, 191CW): ‘A little time ago I heard that a psychologist whose views are 
somewhat different from ours had remarked to one of us that, when all was said 
and done, we did undoubtedly exaggerate the hidden sexual significance of 
dreams: his own commonest dream was of going upstairs, and surely there could 
not be anything sexual in that. We were put on the alert by this objection, and 
began to turn our attention to the appearance of steps, staircases and ladders in 
dreams, and were soon in a position to show that staircases (and analogous 
things) were unquestionably symbols of copulation. It is not hard to discover the 
basis of the comparison: we come to the top in a series of rhythmical movements 
and with increasing breathlessness and then, with a few rapid leaps, we can get 
to the bottom again. Thus the rhythmical pattern of copulation is reproduced 
in going upstairs. Nor must we omit to bring in the evidence of linguistic usage. 
It shows us that “mounting” [German “ steigen ”] is used as a direct equivalent for 
the sexual act. We speak of a man as a “Steiger” [a “mounter”] and of “nach- 
steigen” [“to run after,” literally “to climb after”]. In French the steps on a stair- 
case are called “ marches ” and “ un vieux marcheur” has the same meaning as our 
“ein alter Steiger” [“an old rake”].’ [Cf. also pp. 302 ff.] 




E. Representation by Symbols 


369 


Since ‘bed and board’ constitute marriage, the latter often takes the place 
of the former in dreams and the sexual complex of ideas is, so far as may 
be, transposed on to the eating complex. [1909.] — As regards articles of 
clothing, a woman’s hat can very often be interpreted with certainty as a 
genital organ, and, moreover, as a man s. The same is true of an overcoat 
[German ‘Mantel’] , though in this case it is not clear to what extent the 
use of the symbol is due to a verbal assonance. In men’s dreams a necktie 
often appears as a symbol for the penis. No doubt this is not only because 
neckties are long, dependent objects and peculiar to men, but also because 
they can be chosen according to taste — a liberty which, in the case of the 
object symbolized, is forbidden by Nature. 1 Men who make use of this 
symbol in dreams are often very extravagant in ties in real life and own 
whole collections of them. [1911.] — It is highly probable that all compli- 
cated machinery and apparatus occurring in dreams stand for the genitals 
(and as a rule male ones [1919]) — in describing which dream-symbolism 
is as indefatigable as the ‘joke-work.’ 2 [1909.] Nor is there any doubt that 
all weapons and tools are used as symbols for the male organ: e.g. ploughs, 
hammers, rifles, revolvers, daggers, sabres, etc. [1919.] — In the same way 
many landscapes in dreams, especially any containing bridges or wooded 
hills, may clearly be recognized as descriptions of the genitals. [1911.] 
Marcinowski [1912 a] has published a collection of dreams illustrated by 
their dreamers with drawings that ostensibly represent landscapes and 
other localities occurring in the dreams. These drawings bring out very 
clearly the distinction between a dream’s manifest and latent meaning. 
Whereas to the innocent eye they appear as plans, maps, and so on, closer 
inspection shows that they represent the human body, the genitals, etc., 
and only then do the dreams become intelligible. (See in this connection 
Pfister’s papers [1911-12 and 1913] on cryptograms and puzzle-pictures.) 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] Compare the drawing made by a nineteen-year-old 
manic patient reproduced in Zbl. Psychoanal., 2, 675. [Rohrschach, 1912.] It 
represents a man with a necktie consisting of a snake which is turning in the di- 
rection of a girl. See also the story of ‘The Bashful Man’ in Anthropophyteia , 6, 
334: A lady went into a bathroom, and there she came upon a gentleman who 
scarcely had time to put on his shirt. He was very much embarrassed, but hur- 
riedly covering his throat with the front part of his shirt, he exclaimed: ‘Excuse 
me, but I’ve not got my necktie on.’ 

2 [See Freud’s volume on jokes (1905c), in which he introduced the term ‘joke- 
work’ (on the analogy of ‘dream-work’) to designate the psychological processes 
involved in the production of jokes.] 




370 


VI. The Dream-Work 


[1914.] In the case of unintelligible neologisms, too, it is worth consider- 
ing whether they may not be put together from components with a sexual 
meaning. [191 1.] — Children in dreams often stand for the genitals; and, 
indeed, both men and women are in the habit of referring to their genitals 
affectionately as their ‘little ones.’ [1909.] Stekel [1909, 473] is right in 
recognizing a ‘little brother’ as the penis. [1925.] Playing with a little child, 
beating it, etc., often represent masturbation in dreams. [1911.] — To rep- 
resent castration symbolically, the dream- work makes use of baldness, hair- 
cutting, falling out of teeth and decapitation. If one of the ordinary 
symbols for a penis occurs in a dream doubled or multiplied, it is to be 
regarded as a warding-off of castration. 1 The appearance in dreams of 
lizards — animals whose tails grow again if they are pulled off — has the 
same significance. (Cf. the lizard-dream on pp. 45 f.) — Many of the beasts 
which are used as genital symbols in mythology and folklore play the same 
part in dreams: e.g. fishes, snails, cats, mice (on account of the pubic hair), 
and above all those most important symbols of the male organ — snakes. 
Small animals and vermin represent small children — for instance, unde- 
sired brothers and sisters. Being plagued with vermin is often a sign of 
pregnancy. [1919.] — A quite recent symbol of the male organ in dreams 
deserves mention: the air-ship, whose use in this sense is justified by its 
connection with flying as well as sometimes by its shape. [1911.] 

A number of other symbols have been put forward, with supporting in- 
stances, by Stekel, but have not yet been sufficiently verified. [1911.] 
Stekel’s writings, and in particular his Die Sprache des Tranmes [1911], con- 
tain the fullest collection of interpretations of symbols. Many of these show 
penetration, and further examination has proved them correct: for instance, 
his section on the symbolism of death. But this author’s lack of a critical 
faculty and his tendency to generalization at all costs throw doubts upon 
other of his interpretations or render them unusable; so that it is highly ad- 
visable to exercise caution in accepting his conclusions. 1 therefore content 
myself with drawing attention to only a few of his findings. [1914.] 

According to Stekel, ‘right’ and ‘left’ in dreams have an ethical sense. 
‘The right-hand path always means the path of righteousness and the left- 
hand one that of crime. Thus “left” may represent homosexuality, incest or 
perversion, and “right” may represent marriage, intercourse with a prosti- 


1 [This point is elaborated in Section II of Freud’s paper on ‘The Uncanny’ 
(19197). See also Freud’s posthumously published paper (written in 1922) on 
Medusa’s head (1940c), and below, p. 421.] 




E. Representation by Symbols 


371 


tute and so on, always looked at from the subject’s individual moral stand- 
point.’ (Stekel, 1909, 466 f£) — Relatives in dreams usually play the part of 
genitals (ibid., 473). I can only confirm this in the case of sons, daughters 
and younger sisters 1 — that is only so far as they fall into the category of ‘lit- 
tle ones.’ On the other hand I have come across undoubted cases in which 
‘sisters’ symbolized the breasts and ‘brothers’ the larger hemispheres. — 
Stekel explains failing to catch up with a carriage as regret at a difference in 
age which cannot be caught up with (ibid., 479). — Luggage that one trav- 
els with is a load of sin, he says, that weighs one down (loc. cit.). [1911.] 
But precisely luggage often turns out to be an unmistakable symbol of the 
dreamer’s own genitals. [1914.] Stekel also assigns fixed symbolic meanings 
to numbers, such as often appear in dreams [ibid. 497 f£] . But these expla- 
nations seem neither sufficiently verified nor generally valid, though his in- 
terpretations usually appear plausible in the individual cases. [191 1.] 2 In 
any case the number three has been confirmed from many sides as a sym- 
bol of the male genitals. [1914.] 3 

One of the generalizations put forward by Stekel concerns the double 
significance of genital symbols. [1914.] ‘Where,’ he asks, ‘is there a symbol 
which — provided that the imagination by any means admits of it — cannot 
be employed both in a male and in a female sense?’ [1911, 73.] In any case 
the clause in parenthesis removes much of the certainty from this asser- 
tion, since in fact the imagination does not always admit of it. But I think 
it is worth while remarking that in my experience Stekel’s generalization 
cannot be maintained in the face of the greater complexity of the facts. In 
addition to symbols which can stand with equal frequency for the male 
and for the female genitals, there are some which designate one of the sexes 
predominantly or almost exclusively, and yet others which are known only 
with a male or a female meaning. For it is a fact that the imagination does 
not admit of long, stiff objects and weapons being used as symbols of 
the female genitals, or of hollow objects, such as chests, cases, boxes, etc., 
being used as symbols for the male ones. It is true that the tendency of 


1 [And, apparently, younger brothers, see above, p. 370.] 

2 [At this point, in the 1911 edition only, the following sentence appeared: ‘In 
Wilhelm Stekel’s recently published volume, Die Spmche des Traumes, which ap- 
peared too late for me to notice it, there is to be found (1911, 72 f.) a list of the 
commonest sexual symbols which is intended to show that all sexual symbols 
can be employed bisexually.’] 

3 [A discussion of the number nine will be found in Section 3 of Freud (1923 </).] 




372 


VI. The Dream-Work 


dreams and of unconscious phantasies to employ sexual symbols bisexually 
betrays an archaic characteristic; for in childhood the distinction between 
the genitals of the two sexes is unknown and the same kind of genitals are 
attributed to both of them. [1911.] But it is possible, too, to be misled 
into wrongly supposing that a sexual symbol is bisexual, if one forgets that 
in some dreams there is a general inversion of sex, so that what is male is 
represented as female and vice versa. Dreams of this kind may, for instance, 
express a woman’s wish to be a man. [1925.] 

The genitals can also be represented in dreams by other parts of the 
body: the male organ by a hand or a foot and the female genital orifice by 
the mouth or an ear or even an eye. The secretions of the human body — 
mucus, tears, urine, semen, etc. — can replace one another in dreams. This 
last assertion of Stekel’s [1911, 49], which is on the whole correct, has 
been justifiably criticized by Reitler (1913b) as requiring some qualifica- 
tion: what in fact happens is that significant secretions, such as semen, are 
replaced by indifferent ones. [1919.] 

It is to be hoped that these very incomplete hints may serve to encour- 
age others to undertake a more painstaking general study of the subject 
[1909.] 1 I myself have attempted to give a more elaborate account of 
dream-symbolism in my Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (19 lb- 
17 [Lecture X]). [1919.] 

I shall now append a few examples of the use of these symbols in 
dreams, with the idea of showing how impossible it becomes to arrive at 
the interpretation of a dream if one excludes dream-symbolism, and how 
irresistibly one is driven to accept it in many cases. [1911.] At the same 
time, however, I should like to utter an express warning against over- 
estimating the importance of symbols in dream-interpretation, against re- 
stricting the work of translating dreams merely to translating symbols and 
against abandoning the technique of making use of the dreamer’s associ- 
ations. The two techniques of dream-interpretation must be complemen- 
tary to each other; but both in practice and in theory the first place 
continues to be held by the procedure which I began by describing and 


1 [ Footnote added 1911:] However much Schemer’s view of dream-symbolism 
may differ from the one developed in these pages, I must insist that he is to be 
regarded as the true discoverer of symbolism in dreams, and that the investiga- 
tions of psycho-analysis have at last brought recognition to his book, published 
as it was so many years ago (in 1861), and for so long regarded as fantastic. 




E. Representation by Symbols 


373 


which attributes a decisive significance to the comments made by the 
dreamer, while the translation of symbols, as I have explained it, is also at 
our disposal as an auxiliary method. [1909.] 


i 

A Hat as a Symbol of a Man 
(or of Male Genitals) (1911) 1 

(Extract from the dream of a young woman suffering from agorapho- 
bia as a result of fears of seduction.) 

7 ivas walking in the street in the summer, wearing a straw hat of peculiar 
shape; its middle-piece was bent upwards and its side-pieces hung downwards ’ 
(the description became hesitant at this point) ‘in such a ivay that one side 
was lower than the other. I was cheerful and in a self-confident frame of 


1 [This dream and the two next ones were first published in a paper entitled ‘Ad- 
ditional Examples of Dream-Interpretation’ ( 1 9 1 1 a) . The paper was introduced 
by the following paragraphs, which have never been reprinted in German: 

‘Some Instances of Dream-Symbols . — Of the many objections that have been 
raised against the procedure of psycho-analysis, the strangest, and, perhaps, one 
might add, the most ignorant, seems to me to be doubt as to the existence of 
symbolism in dreams and the unconscious. For no one who carries out psycho- 
analyses can avoid assuming the presence of such symbolism, and the resolution 
of dreams by symbols has been practised from the earliest times. On the other 
hand, I am ready to admit that the occurrence of these symbols should be sub- 
ject to particularly strict proof in view of their great multiplicity. 

‘In what follows I have put together some examples from my most recent ex- 
perience: cases in which a solution by means of a particular symbol strikes me as 
especially revealing. By this means a dream acquires a meaning which it could 
otherwise never have found; it falls into place in the chain of the dreamer’s 
thoughts and its interpretation is recognized by the subject himself. 

‘On a point of technique I may remark that a dreamer’s associations are apt 
to fail precisely in connection with the symbolic elements of dreams. In my 
record of these few selected examples I have tried to draw a sharp line between 
the work of the patient (or dreamer) himself and my own interventions.’ 

The paper ended with some shorter examples, which will be found reprinted 
in Section F of this chapter (Nos. 2, 3 and 4 on pp. 417 fi). In the original paper 
these were introduced as follows: 




374 


VI. The Dream-Work 


mind; and, as I passed a group of young officers, I thought: “None of you can 
do me any harm!”’ 

Since nothing occurred to her in connection with the hat in the dream, 
I said: ‘No doubt the hat was a male genital organ, with its middle-piece 
sticking up and its two side-pieces hanging down. It may seem strange, 
perhaps, that a hat should be a man, but you will remember the phrase 
“ Unter die Haube kommen” [“to find a husband” (literally “to come under 
the cap”)].’ I intentionally gave her no interpretation of the detail about 
the two side-pieces hanging down unevenly; though it is precisely details 
of this kind that must point the way in determining an interpretation. I 
went on to say that as she had a husband with such fine genitals there was 
no need for her to be afraid of the officers — no need, that is, for her to 
wish for anything from them, since as a rule she was prevented from going 
for a walk unprotected and unaccompanied owing to her phantasies of be- 
ing seduced. I had already been able to give her this last explanation of her 
anxiety on several occasions upon the basis of other material. 

The way in which the dreamer reacted to this material was most re- 
markable. She withdrew her description of the hat and maintained that 
she had never said that the two side-pieces hung down. I was too certain 
of what I had heard to be led astray, and stuck to my guns. She was silent 
for a while and then found enough courage to ask what was meant by one 
of her husband’s testes hanging down lower than the other and whether 
it was the same in all men. In this way the remarkable detail of the hat 
was explained and the interpretation accepted by her. 

At the time my patient told me this dream I had long been familiar 
with the hat-symbol. Other, less transparent cases had led me to suppose 
that a hat can also stand for female genitals . 1 


‘Some Rarer Forms of Representation . — I have mentioned “considerations of 
representability” as one of the factors that influence the formation of dreams. In 
the process of transforming a thought into a visual image a peculiar faculty is re- 
vealed by dreamers, and an analyst is rarely equal to following it with his guesses. 
It will therefore give him real satisfaction if the intuitive perception of the 
dreamer — the creator of these representations — is able to explain their meaning.’] 

1 [ Footnote 1911:] Cf. an example of this in Kirchgraber (1912). Stekel (1909, 
475) records a dream in which a hat with a feather standing up crooked in the 
middle of it symbolized an (impotent) man. [Freud suggested an explanation of 
hat symbolism in a later paper (1916c).] 




E. Representation by Symbols 


375 


n 

A ‘Little One’ as the Genital Organ — 

‘Being Run Over’ as a Symbol of 
Sexual Intercourse [1911] 

(Another dream of the same agoraphobic patient.) 

Her mother sent her little daughter away, so that she had to go by herself. 
Then she went in a train with her mother and saw her little one ivalk straight 
on to the rails so that she was bound to be run over. She heard the cracking of 
her bones. (This produced an uncomfortable feeling in her but no real horror.) 
Then she looked round out of the window of the railway-carriage to see 
whether the parts coidd not be seen behind. Then she reproached her mother 
for having made the little one go by herself. 

Analysis. — It is no easy matter to give a complete interpretation of the 
dream. It formed part of a cycle of dreams and can only be fully under- 
stood if it is taken in connection with the others. There is difficulty in ob- 
taining in sufficient isolation the material necessary for establishing the 
symbolism. — In the first place, the patient declared that the train journey 
was to be interpreted historically, as an allusion to a journey she had taken 
when she was leaving a sanatorium for nervous diseases, with whose direc- 
tor, needless to say, she had been in love. Her mother had fetched her away, 
and the doctor had appeared at the station and handed her a bouquet of 
flowers as a parting present. It had been very awkward that her mother 
should have witnessed this tribute. At this point, then, her mother figured 
as interfering with her attempts at a love affair; and this had in fact been 
the part played by that severe lady during the patient’s girlhood. — Her 
next association related to the sentence: ‘she looked round to see whether 
the parts could not be seen from behind.’ The facade of the dream would 
of course lead one to think of the parts of her little daughter who had been 
run over and mangled. But her association led in quite another direction. 
She recollected having once seen her father naked in the bathroom from 
behind; she went on to talk of the distinctions between the sexes, and laid 
stress on the fact that a man’s genitals can be seen even from behind but a 
woman’s cannot. In this connection she herself interpreted ‘the little one’ 
as meaning the genitals and ‘her little one’ — she had a four-year-old 



376 


VI. The Dream-Work 


daughter — as her own genitals. She reproached her mother with having 
expected her to live as though she had no genitals, and pointed out that the 
same reproach was expressed in the opening sentence of the dream: ‘her 
mother sent her little one away, so that she had to go by herself.’ In her 
imagination ‘going by herself in the streets’ meant not having a man, not 
having any sexual relations (‘ coire in Latin [from which ‘coitus’ is derived] 
means literally ‘to go with’) — and she disliked that. Her accounts all went 
to show that when she was a girl she had in fact suffered from her mother’s 
jealousy owing to the preference shown her by her father. 1 

The deeper interpretation of this dream was shown by another dream 
of the same night, in which the dreamer identified herself with her 
brother. She had actually been a boyish girl, and had often been told that 
she should have been a boy. This identification with her brother made it 
particularly clear that ‘the little one’ meant a genital organ. Her mother 
was threatening him (or her) with castration, which could only have been 
a punishment for playing with her penis; thus the identification also 
proved that she herself had masturbated as a child — a memory which till 
then she had only had as applied to her brother. The information sup- 
plied by the second dream showed that she must have come to know 
about the male organ at an early age and have afterwards forgotten it. 
Further, the second dream alluded to the infantile sexual theory according 
to which girls are boys who have been castrated. [Cf. Freud, 1908c.] 
When I suggested to her that she had had this childish belief, she at once 
confirmed the fact by telling me that she had heard the anecdote of the 
little boy’s saying to the little girl: ‘Cut off?’ and of the little girl’s reply- 
ing: ‘No, always been like that.’ 

Thus the sending away of the little one (of the genital organ) in the 
first dream was also related to the threat of castration. Her ultimate com- 
plaint against her mother was for not having given birth to her as a boy. 

The fact that ‘being run over’ symbolizes sexual intercourse would not 
be obvious from this dream, though it has been confirmed from many 
other sources. 


1 [In the 1911 edition only, the following sentence was added at this point: ‘Stekel 
[1909, 473], basing himself on a very common idiomatic usage, has suggested 
that the “little one” is a symbol of the male or female genitals.’] 




E. Representation by Symbols 


377 


hi 

The Genitals Represented by Buildings, 

Stairs and Shafts [1911] 1 

(The dream of a young man inhibited by his father-complex.) 

He was going for a walk ivith his father in a place ivhich must certainly 
have been the Prater , 2 since he saw the rotunda, with a small annex in 
front of it to ivhich a captive balloon was attached, though it looked 
rather limp. His father asked him what all this was for; he was surprised at 
his asking, but explained it to him. Then they came into a courtyard which 
had a large sheet of tin laid out in it. His father wanted to pull off a large 
piece of it, but first looked around to see if anyone was watching. He told him 
that he need only tell the foreman and he could take some ivithout any bother. 
A staircase led down from this yard into a shaft, whose walls were cush- 
ioned in some soft material, rather like a leather armchair. At the end of the 
shaft was a longish platform and then another shaft started. . . . 

Analysis. — This dreamer belonged to a type whose therapeutic pros- 
pects are not favourable: up to a certain point they offer no resistance at 
all to analysis, but from then onwards turn out to be almost inaccessible. 
He interpreted this dream almost unaided. ‘The Rotunda,’ he said, ‘was 
my genitals and the captive balloon in front of it was my penis, whose 
limpness I have reason to complain of.’ Going into greater detail, then, 
we may translate the Rotunda as the bottom (habitually regarded by chil- 
dren as part of the genitals) and the small annex in front of it as the scro- 
tum. His father asked him in the dream what all this was, that is, what 
was the purpose and function of the genitals. It seemed plausible to re- 
verse this situation and turn the dreamer into the questioner. Since he had 
in fact never questioned his father in this way, we had to look upon the 
dream-thought as a wish, or take it as a conditional clause, such as: ‘If I 
had asked my father for sexual enlightenment . . .’ We shall presently find 
the continuation of this thought in another part of the dream. 


1 [This dream and its interpretation are reproduced in Freud’s Introductory Lec- 
tures (1916-17), Lecture XII, No. 7.] 

2 [See footnote, p. 214.] 




378 


VI. The Dream-Work 


The courtyard in which the sheet of tin was spread out is not to be taken 
symbolically in the first instance. It was derived from the business premises 
of the dreamer’s father. For reasons of discretion I have substituted ‘tin’ for 
another material in which his father actually dealt: but I have made no other 
change in the wording of the dream. The dreamer had entered his father’s 
business and had taken violent objection to the somewhat dubious practices 
on which the firm’s earnings in part depended. Consequently the dream- 
thought I have just interpreted may have continued in this way: ‘(If I had 
asked him), he would have deceived me just as he deceives his customers.’ 
As regards the ‘pulling off’ which served to represent his father’s dishonesty 
in business, the dreamer himself produced a second explanation — namely 
that it stood for masturbating. Not only was I already familiar with this in- 
terpretation (see p. 362 n. 2 above), but there was something to confirm it 
by the fact that the secret nature of masturbation was represented by its re- 
verse: it might be done openly. Just as we should expect, the masturbatory 
activity was once again displaced on to the dreamer’s father, like the ques- 
tioning in the first scene of the dream. He promptly interpreted the shaft as 
a vagina, having regard to the soft cushioning of its walls. 1 added from my 
own knowledge derived elsewhere that climbing down, like climbing up in 
other cases, described sexual intercourse in the vagina. (See my remarks [in 
Freud 1910<7], quoted above, p. 368 n. 2.) 

The dreamer himself gave a biographical explanation of the fact that the 
first shaft was followed by a longish platform and then by another shaft. He 
had practised intercourse for a time but had then given it up on account of 
inhibitions, and he now hoped to be able to resume it by the help of the 
treatment. The dream became more indistinct, however, towards the end, 
and it must seem probable to anyone who is familiar with these things that 
the influence of another topic was already making itself felt in the second 
scene of the dream, and was hinted at by the father’s business, by his de- 
ceitful conduct and by the interpretation of the first shaft as a vagina: all 
this pointed to a connection with the dreamer’s mother. 1 

1 [The following additional paragraph was appended to this dream on its first 
publication (in Freud, 1911a): ‘This dream as a whole belongs to the not un- 
common class of “biographical” dreams, in which the dreamer gives a survey of 
his sexual life in the form of a continuous narrative. (See the example [on pp. 
361 ff.]) — The frequency with which buildings, localities and landscapes are em- 
ployed as symbolic representations of the body, and in particular (with constant 
reiteration) of the genitals, would certainly deserve a comprehensive study, illus- 
trated by numerous examples.’] 



E. Representation by Symbols 


379 


IV 

The Male Organ Represented by Persons and the 
Female Organ by a Landscape [1911] 

(The dream of an uneducated woman whose husband was a police- 
man, reported by B. Dattner.) 

. . Then someone broke into the house and she ivas frightened and called 
out for a policeman. But he had quietly gone into a church , 1 to ivhich a num- 
ber of steps 2 led up, accompanied by two tramps. Behind the church there was 
a hill 3 and above it a thick ivood . 4 5 The policeman was dressed in a helmet, 
brass collar and cloak ? He had a broivn beard. The two tramps, ivho went 
along peaceably ivith the policeman, had sack-like aprons tied round their 
middles . 6 In front of the church a path led up to the hill; on both sides of it 
there grew grass and brushwood, which became thicker and thicker and, at 
the top of the hill, turned into a regular wood. ’ 


v 

Dreams of Castration in Children [1919] 

(a) A boy aged three years and five months, who obviously disliked the 
idea of his father’s returning from the front, woke up one morning in a dis- 
turbed and excited state. He kept on repeating: 1 Why was Daddy carrying 
his head on a plate ? Last night Daddy was carrying his head on a plate. ’ 

[b) A student who is now suffering from a severe obsessional neurosis re- 
members having repeatedly had the following dream during his sixth year: 
He went to the hairdresser’s to have his hair cut. A big, severe-looking woman 
came up to hhn and cut his head ojf. He recognized the woman as his mother. 


1 ‘Or chapel (= vagina).’ 

2 ‘Symbol of copulation.’ 

3 ‘Mons veneris.’ 

4 ‘Pubic hair.’ 

5 ‘According to an expert, demons in cloaks and hoods are of a phallic character.’ 

6 ‘The two halves of the scrotum.’ 




380 


VI. The Dream-Work 


vi 

Urinary Symbolism [1914] 

The series of drawings reproduced [on p. 624] were found by Ferenczi 
in a Hungarian comic paper called Fidibusz, and he at once saw how well 
they could be used to illustrate the theory of dreams. Otto Rank has al- 
ready reproduced them in a paper (1912tz, [99]). 

The drawings bear the title ‘A French Nurse’s Dream’; but it is only the 
last picture, showing the nurse being woken up by the child’s screams, that 
tells us that the seven previous pictures represent the phases of a dream. The 
first picture depicts the stimulus which should have caused the sleeper to 
wake: the little boy has become aware of a need and is asking for help in 
dealing with it. But in the dream the dreamer, instead of being in the bed- 
room, is taking the child for a walk. In the second picture she has already led 
him to a street corner where he is micturating — and she can go on sleeping. 
But the arousal stimulus continues; indeed, it increases. The little boy, find- 
ing he is not being attended to, screams louder and louder. The more impe- 
riously he insists upon his nurse waking up and helping him, the more 
insistent becomes the dream’s assurance that everything is all right and that 
there is no need for her to wake up. At the same time, the dream translates 
the increasing stimulus into the increasing dimensions of its symbols. The 
stream of water produced by the micturating boy becomes mightier and 
mightier. In the fourth picture it is already large enough to float a rowing 
boat; but there follow a gondola, a sailing-ship and finally a liner. The in- 
genious artist has in this way cleverly depicted the struggle between an ob- 
stinate craving for sleep and an inexhaustible stimulus towards waking. 


VII 

A Staircase Dream [1911] 

(Reported and Interpreted by Otto Rank.) 1 

‘I have to thank the same colleague to whom I owe the dream with a 
dental stimulus [recorded on pp. 399 ff. below] for an equally transparent 
emission dream; 


1 [Apparently not published elsewhere.] 



E. Representation by Symbols 


381 


“7 was running down the staircase [of a block of flats] in pursuit of a little 
girl ivho had done something to me, in order to punish her. At the foot of the 
stairs someone (a groivn-up woman?) stopped the child for me. I caught hold 
of her; but I don ’t know ivhether I hit her, for I stiddenly found myself on the 
middle of the staircase copulating ivith the child (as it ivere in the air). It was 
not a real copulation; I was only rubbing my genitals against her external 
genitals, and while I did so I saw them extremely distinctly, as well as her 
head, which was turned upwards and sideways. During the sexual act I saiv 
hanging above me to my left (also as it were in the air) tivo small paintings — 
landscapes representing a house surrounded by trees. At the bottom of the 
smaller of these, instead of the painter’s signature, I saw my own first name, 
as though it were intended as a birthday present for me. Then I saw a label 
in front of the two pictures, which said that cheaper pictures were also to be 
had. (I then saw myself very indistinctly as though I were lying in bed on the 
landing) and I was woken up by the feeling of wetness caused by the emission 
I had had. ” 

‘Interpretation. — On the evening of the dream-day the dreamer 
had been in a bookshop, and as he was waiting to be attended to he had 
looked at some pictures which were on view there and which represented 
subjects similar to those in the dream. He went up close to one small pic- 
ture which had particularly pleased him, to look at the artist’s name — but 
it had been quite unknown to him. 

‘Later the same evening, when he was with some friends, he had heard 
a story of a Bohemian servant-girl who boasted that her illegitimate child 
had been “made on the stairs.” The dreamer had enquired the details of 
this rather unusual event and had learnt that the servant-girl had gone 
home with her admirer to her parents’ house, where there had been no 
opportunity for sexual intercourse, and in his excitement the man had 
copulated with her on the stairs. The dreamer had made a joking allusion 
to a malicious expression used to describe adulterated wines, and had said 
that in fact the child came of a “cellar-stair vintage.” 

‘So much for the connections with the previous day, which appeared 
with some insistence in the dream-content and were reproduced by the 
dreamer without any difficulty. But he brought up no less easily an old 
fragment of infantile recollection which had also found its use in the 
dream. The staircase belonged to the house where he had spent the greater 
part of his childhood and, in particular, where he had first made conscious 
acquaintance with the problems of sex. He had frequently played on this 
staircase and, among other things, used to slide down the banisters, riding 



382 


VI. The Dream-Work 


astride on them — which had given him sexual feelings. In the dream, too, 
he rushed down the stairs extraordinarily fast — so fast, indeed, that, ac- 
cording to his own specific account, he did not put his feet down on the 
separate steps but “flew” down them, as people say. If the infantile experi- 
ence is taken into account, the beginning part of the dream seems to rep- 
resent the factor of sexual excitement. — But the dreamer had also often 
romped in a sexual way with the neighbours’ children on this same stair- 
case and in the adjacent building, and had satisfied his desires in just the 
same way as he did in the dream. 

‘If we bear in mind that Freud’s researches into sexual symbolism 
(191 0<V [see above, p. 368 «.]) have shown that stairs and going upstairs 
in dreams almost invariably stand for copulation, the dream becomes 
quite transparent. Its motive force, as indeed was shown by its outcome — 
an emission — was of a purely libidinal nature. The dreamer’s sexual ex- 
citement was awakened during his sleep — this being represented in the 
dream by his rushing down the stairs. The sadistic element in the sexual 
excitement, based on the romping in childhood, was indicated by the 
pursuit and overpowering of the child. The libidinal excitement increased 
and pressed towards sexual action — represented in the dream by his 
catching hold of the child and conveying it to the middle of the staircase. 
Up to that point the dream was only symbolically sexual and would have 
been quite unintelligible to any inexperienced dream-interpreter. But 
symbolic satisfaction of that kind was not enough to guarantee a restful 
sleep, in view of the strength of the libidinal excitation. The excitation led 
to an orgasm and thus revealed the fact that the whole staircase- 
symbolism represented copulation. — The present dream offers a specially 
clear confirmation of Freud’s view that one of the reasons for the use of 
going upstairs as a sexual symbol is the rhythmical character of both ac- 
tivities: for the dreamer expressly stated that the most clearly defined ele- 
ment in the whole dream was the rhythm of the sexual act and its up and 
down motion. 

‘I must add a word with regard to the two pictures which, apart from 
their real meaning, also figured in a symbolic sense as “ Weibsbilder This 
was shown at once by there being a large picture and a small picture, just 
as a large (or grown-up) girl and a small one appeared in the dream. The 
fact that “cheaper pictures were also to be had” led to the prostitute- 


1 [Literally ‘pictures of women’ — a common German idiom for ‘women.’] 




E. Representation by Symbols 


383 


complex; while on the other hand the appearance of the dreamer’s first 
name on the small picture and the idea of its being intended as a birthday 
present for him were hints at the parental complex. (“Born on the stairs” 
= “begotten by copulation.”) 

‘The indistinct final scene, in which the dreamer saw himself lying in 
bed on the landing and had a feeling of wetness, seems to have pointed the 
way beyond infantile masturbation still further back into childhood and 
to have had its prototype in similarly pleasurable scenes of bed-wetting.’ 


VIII 

A Modified Staircase Dream [1911] 

One of my patients, a man whose sexual abstinence was imposed on 
him by a severe neurosis, and whose [unconscious] phantasies were fixed 
upon his mother, had repeated dreams of going upstairs in her company. 
I once remarked to him that a moderate amount of masturbation would 
probably do him less harm than his compulsive self-restraint, and this 
provoked the following dream: 

His piano-teacher reproached him for neglecting his piano-playing, and 
for not practising Mocheles’ ‘Etudes’ and Clementi’s ‘Gradus ad Parnassum. ’ 

By way of comment, he pointed out that ‘ Gradus ’ are also ‘steps’; and 
that the key-board itself is a staircase, since it contains scales [ladders] . 

It is fair to say that there is no group of ideas that is incapable of rep- 
resenting sexual facts and wishes. 


IX 

The Feeling of Reality and the 
Representation of Repetition [1919] 

A man who is now thirty-five years old reported a dream which he re- 
membered clearly and claimed to have had at the age of four. The lawyer 
who had charge of his father’s ivill — he had lost his father when he was 
three — brought two large pears. He was given one of them to eat; the other 
lay on the window-sill in the sitting-room. He awoke with a conviction of 
the reality of what he had dreamt and kept obstinately asking his mother 



384 


VI. The Dream-Work 


for the second pear, and insisted that it was on the window-sill. His 
mother had laughed at this. 

Analysis. — The lawyer was a jovial old gentleman who, the dreamer 
seemed to remember, had really once brought some pears along. The 
window-sill was as he had seen it in the dream. Nothing else occurred to 
him in connection with it — only that his mother had told him a dream 
shortly before. She had had two birds sitting on her head and had asked 
herself when they would fly away; they did not fly away; but one of them 
flew to her mouth and sucked at it. 

The failure of the dreamer’s associations gave us a right to attempt an 
interpretation by symbolic substitution. The two pears — ‘ pommes ou 
poires — were his mother’s breasts which had given him nourishment; the 
window-sill was the projection formed by her bosom — like balconies in 
dreams of houses (see p. 368). His feeling of reality after waking was jus- 
tified, for his mother had really suckled him, and had done so, in fact, for 
far longer than the usual time and his mother’s breast was still available 
to him. 1 The dream must be translated: ‘Give (or show) me your breast 
again, Mother, that I used to drink from in the past.’ ‘In the past’ was rep- 
resented by his eating one of the pears; ‘again’ was represented by his 
longing for the other. The temporal repetition of an act is regularly shown 
in dreams by the numerical multiplication of an object. 

It is most remarkable, of course, that symbolism should already be 
playing a part in the dream of a four-year-old child. But this is the rule 
and not the exception. It may safely be asserted that dreamers have sym- 
bolism at their disposal from the very first. 

The following uninfluenced recollection by a lady who is now twenty- 
seven shows at what an early age symbolism is employed outside dream- 
life as well as inside it. She was between three and four years old. Her 
nurse-maid took her to the lavatory along with a brother eleven months her 
junior and a girl cousin of an age between the other two, to do their small 
business before going out for a walk. Being the eldest, she sat on the seat, ivhile 
the other tivo sat on chambers. She asked her cousin: ‘Have you got a purse 
too? Walter’s got a little sausage; I’ve got a purse.’ Her cousin replied: ‘Yes, I’ve 


1 [Cf. p. 210. This point — the fact that a specially strong feeling after waking of 
the reality of the dream or of some part of it actually relates to the latent dream- 
thoughts — is insisted upon by Freud in a passage towards the end of Chapter II 
of his study on Jensen’s Gradiva (1907a) and in the course of his first comments 
on the ‘Wolf Man’s’ dream (Section IV of Freud, 1918^).] 



E. Representation by Symbols 


385 


got a purse too. ’ The nursemaid heard what they said ivith much amusement 
and reported the conversation to the children ’s mother, who reacted ivith a 
sharp reprimand. 

I will here interpolate a dream (recorded in a paper by Alfred Robitsek, 
1912), in which the beautifully chosen symbolism made an interpretation 
possible with only slight assistance from the dreamer. 


x 

‘The Question of Symbolism in the 
Dreams of Normal Persons’ [1914] 

‘One objection which is frequently brought forward by opponents of 
psycho-analysis, and which has lately been voiced by Havelock Ellis 
(1911, 168), argues that though dream-symbolism may perhaps occur as 
a product of the neurotic mind, it is not to be found in normal persons. 
Now psycho-analytic research finds no fundamental, but only quantita- 
tive, distinctions between normal and neurotic life; and indeed the analy- 
sis of dreams, in which repressed complexes are operative alike in the 
healthy and the sick, shows a complete identity both in their mechanisms 
and in their symbolism. The naive dreams of healthy people actually of- 
ten contain a much simpler, more perspicuous and more characteristic 
symbolism than those of neurotics; for in the latter, as a result of the more 
powerful workings of the censorship and of the consequently more far- 
reaching dream-distortion, the symbolism may be obscure and hard to in- 
terpret. The dream recorded below will serve to illustrate this fact. It was 
dreamt by a girl who is not neurotic but is of a somewhat prudish and re- 
served character. In the course of conversation with her I learnt that she 
was engaged, but that there were some difficulties in the way of her mar- 
riage which were likely to lead to its postponement. Of her own accord 
she told me the following dream. 

“7 arrange the centre of a table with flowers for a birthday. In reply to a 
question she told me that in the dream she seemed to be in her own home 
(where she was not at present living) and had “a feeling of happiness.” 


1 [In the present analysis all the material printed in italics occurs in English in the 
original, exactly as here reproduced.] 




386 


VI. The Dream-Work 


‘“Popular” symbolism made it possible for me to translate the dream 
unaided. It was an expression of her bridal wishes: the table with its floral 
centre-piece symbolized herself and her genitals; she represented her 
wishes for the future as fulfilled, for her thoughts were already occupied 
with the birth of a baby; so her marriage lay a long way behind her. 

‘I pointed out to her that ‘"the ‘centre’ of a table” was an unusual ex- 
pression (which she admitted), but I could not of course question her fur- 
ther directly on that point. I carefully avoided suggesting the meaning of 
the symbols to her, and merely asked her what came into her head in con- 
nection with the separate parts of the dream. In the course of the analysis 
her reserve gave place to an evident interest in the interpretation and to 
an openness made possible by the seriousness of the conversation. 

‘When I asked what flowers they had been, her first reply was: “expen- 
sive flowers; one has to pay for them” and then that they had been “ lilies of 
the valley, violets and pinks or carnations. ” I assumed that the word “lily” 
appeared in the dream in its popular sense as a symbol of chastity; she 
confirmed this assumption, for her association to “lily” was “purity.” “ Val- 
ley ” is a frequent female symbol in dreams; so that the chance combina- 
tion of the two symbols in the English name of the flower was used in the 
dream-symbolism to stress the preciousness of her virginity — “ expensive 
floivers, one has to pay for them” — and to express her expectation that her 
husband would know how to appreciate its value. The phrase “expensive 
flowers,” etc., as will be seen, had a different meaning in the case of each 
of the three flower-symbols. 

‘“Violets” was ostensibly quite asexual; but, very boldly, as it seemed to 
me, I thought I could trace a secret meaning for the word in an uncon- 
scious link with the French word “viol” [“rape”]. To my surprise the 
dreamer gave as an association the English word “violate.” The dream had 
made use of the great chance similarity between the words “ violet ” and 
“ violate ” — the difference in their pronunciation lies merely in the different 
stress upon their final syllables — in order to express “in the language of 
flowers” the dreamer’s thoughts on the violence of defloration (another 
term that employs flower symbolism) and possibly also a masochistic trait 
in her character. A pretty instance of the “verbal bridges” [see p. 355 n.] 
crossed by the paths leading to the unconscious. The words “ one has to pay 
for them ” signified having to pay with her life for being a wife and a mother. 

‘In connection with “pinks,” which she went on to call “ carnations ,” I 
thought of the connection between that word and “carnal.” But the 
dreamer’s association to it was “colour.” She added that “ carnations ” were 



E. Representation by Symbols 


387 


the flowers which her fiance ” gave her frequently and in great numbers. At 
the end of her remarks she suddenly confessed of her own accord that she 
had not told the truth: what had occurred to her had not been “ colour ’ but 
“ incarnation ” — the word I had expected. Incidentally “ colour ” itself was 
not a very remote association, but was determined by the meaning of “car- 
nation (flesh-colour) — was determined, that is, by the same complex. 
This lack of straightforwardness showed that it was at this point that resis- 
tance was greatest, and corresponded to the fact that this was where the 
symbolism was most clear and that the struggle between libido and its re- 
pression was at its most intense in relation to this phallic theme. The 
dreamer’s comment to the effect that her fiance frequently gave her flowers 
of that kind was an indication not only of the double sense of the word 
“ carnations' but also of their phallic meaning in the dream. The gift of 
flowers, an exciting factor of the dream derived from her current life, was 
used to express an exchange of sexual gifts: she was making a gift of her 
virginity and expected a full emotional and sexual life in return for it. At 
this point, too, the words “ expensive flowers, one has to pay for them” must 
have had what was no doubt literally a financial meaning. — Thus the 
flower symbolism in this dream included virginal feminity, masculinity 
and an allusion to defloration by violence. It is worth pointing out in this 
connection that sexual flower symbolism, which, indeed, occurs very com- 
monly in other connections, symbolizes the human organs of sex by blos- 
soms, which are the sexual organs of plants. It may perhaps be true in 
general that gifts of flowers between lovers have this unconscious meaning. 

‘The birthday for which she was preparing in the dream meant, no 
doubt, the birth of a baby. She was identifying herself with her fiance, and 
was representing him as “arranging” her for a birth — that is, as copulating 
with her. The latent thought may have run: “If I were he, I wouldn’t 
wait — I would deflower my fiancee without asking her leave — I would use 
violence.” This was indicated by the word “violate” and in this way the 
sadistic component of the libido found expression. 

‘In a deeper layer of the dream, the phrase “I arrange ...” must no 
doubt have an auto-erotic, that is to say, an infantile, significance. 

‘The dreamer also revealed an awareness, which was only possible to 
her in a dream, of her physical deficiency: she saw herself like a table, 
without projections, and on that account laid all the more emphasis on 
the preciousness of the “ centre ” — on another occasion she used the words, 
“a centre-piece of flowers” — that is to say, on her virginity. The horizontal 
attribute of a table must also have contributed something to the symbol. 



388 


VI. The Dream-Work 


‘The concentration of the dream should be observed: there was noth- 
ing superfluous in it, every word was a symbol. 

‘Later on the dreamer produced an addendum to the dream: “7 deco- 
rate the flowers with green crinkled paper. ” She added that it was “ fancy pa- 
per ” of the sort used for covering common flowerpots. She went on: “to 
hide untidy things, whatever ivas to be seen, which was not pretty to the eye; 
there is a gap, a little space in the flowers. The paper looks like velvet or 
moss.” — To “ decorate ” she gave the association “ decorum ,” as I had ex- 
pected. She said the green colour predominated, and her association to it 
was “hope” — another link with pregnancy. — In this part of the dream the 
chief factor was not identification with a man; ideas of shame and self- 
revelation came to the fore. She was making herself beautiful for him and 
was admitting physical defects which she felt ashamed of and was trying 
to correct. Her associations “ velvet ” and “moss” were a clear indication of 
a reference to pubic hair. 

‘This dream, then, gave expression to thoughts of which the girl was 
scarcely aware in her waking life — thoughts concerned with sensual love 
and its organs. She was being “arranged for a birthday” — that is, she was 
being copulated with. The fear of being deflowered was finding expres- 
sion, and perhaps, too, ideas of pleasurable suffering. She admitted her 
physical deficiencies to herself and overcompensated for them by an over- 
valuation of her virginity. Her shame put forward as an excuse for the 
signs of sensuality the fact that its purpose was the production of a baby. 
Material considerations, too, alien to a lover’s mind, found their way to 
expression. The affect attaching to this simple dream — a feeling of 
happiness — indicated that powerful emotional complexes had found sat- 
isfaction in it.’ 

Ferenczi (19 17) 1 has justly pointed out that the meaning of symbols and 
the significance of dreams can be arrived at with particular ease from the 
dreams of precisely those people who are uninitiated into psycho-analysis. 

At this point I shall interpose a dream dreamt by a contemporary his- 
torical figure. I am doing so because in it an object that would in any case 
appropriately represent a male organ has a further attribute which estab- 
lished it in the clearest fashion as a phallic symbol. The fact of a riding 
whip growing to an endless length could scarcely be taken to mean any- 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1919.] 




E. Representation by Symbols 


389 


thing but an erection. Apart from this, too, the dream is an excellent in- 
stance of the way in which thoughts of a serious kind, far removed from 
anything sexual, can come to be represented by infantile sexual material. 


XI 

A Dream of Bismarck’s [1919] 1 

In his Gedanken und Erinnerungen [1898, 2, 194; English translation 
by A. J. Butler, Bismarck, the Man and the Statesman, 1 898, 2, 209 £] Bis- 
marck quotes a letter written by him to the Emperor William I on De- 
cember 18th, 1881, in the course of which the following passage occurs; 
“Your Majesty’s communication encourages me to relate a dream which 
I had in the Spring of 1863, in the hardest days of the Conflict, from 
which no human eye could see any possible way out. I dreamt (as I re- 
lated the first thing next morning to my wife and other witnesses) that I 
was riding on a narrow Alpine path, precipice on the right, rocks on the 
left. The path grew narrower, so that the horse refused to proceed, and it 
was impossible to turn round or dismount, owing to lack of space. Then, 
with my whip in my left hand, I struck the smooth rock and called on 
God. The whip grew to an endless length, the rocky wall dropped like a 
piece of stage scenery and opened out a broad path, with a view over hills 
and forests, like a landscape in Bohemia; there were Prussian troops with 
banners, and even in my dream the thought came to me at once that I 
must report it to your Majesty. This dream was fulfilled, and I woke up 
rejoiced and strengthened. . . 

‘The action of this dream falls into two sections. In the first part the 
dreamer found himself in an impasse from which he was miraculously res- 
cued in the second part. The difficult situation in which the horse and its 
rider were placed is an easily recognizable dream-picture of the statesman’s 
critical position, which he may have felt with particular bitterness as he 
thought over the problems of his policy on the evening before the dream. 
In the passage quoted above Bismarck himself uses the same simile [of 
there being no possible “way out”] in describing the hopelessness of his 
position at the time. The meaning of the dream-picture must therefore 


1 From a paper by Harms Sachs [1913.] 



390 


VI. The Dream-Work 


have been quite obvious to him. We are at the same time presented with a 
fine example of Silberer’s “functional phenomenon” [cf. pp. 507 ff.]. The 
process taking place in the dreamer’s mind — each of the solutions at- 
tempted by his thoughts being met in turn by insuperable obstacles, while 
nevertheless he could not and might not tear himself free from the consid- 
eration of those problems — were most appropriately depicted by the rider 
who could neither advance nor retreat. His pride, which forbade his think- 
ing of surrendering or resigning, was expressed in the dream by the words 
“it was impossible to turn round or dismount.” In his quality of a man of 
action who exerted himself unceasingly and toiled for the good of others, 
Bismarck must have found it easy to liken himself to a horse; and in fact 
he did so on many occasions, for instance, in his well-known saying: “A 
good horse dies in harness.” In this sense the words “the horse refused to 
proceed” meant nothing more nor less than that the over-tired statesman 
felt a need to turn away from the cares of the immediate present, or, to put 
it another way, that he was in the act of freeing himself from the bonds of 
the reality principle by sleeping and dreaming. The wish-fulfilment which 
became so prominent in the second part of the dream, was already hinted 
at in the words “Alpine path.” No doubt Bismarck already knew at that 
time that he was going to spend his next vacation in the Alps — at Gastein; 
thus the dream, by conveying him thither, set him free at one blow from 
all the burdens of State business. 

‘In the second part of the dream, the dreamer’s wishes were represented 
as fulfilled in two ways: undisguisedly and obviously, and, in addition, 
symbolically. Their fulfilment was represented symbolically by the disap- 
pearance of the obstructive rock and the appearance in its place of a broad 
path — the “way out,” which he was in search of, in its most convenient 
form; and, it was represented undisguisedly in the picture of the advancing 
Prussian troops. In order to explain this prophetic vision there is no need 
whatever for constructing mystical hypotheses; Freud’s theory of wish- 
fulfilment fully suffices. Already at the time of this dream Bismarck desired 
a victorious war against Austria as the best escape from Prussia’s internal 
conflicts. Thus the dream was representing this wish as fulfilled, just as is 
postulated by Freud, when the dreamer saw the Prussian troops with their 
banners in Bohemia, that is, in enemy country. The only peculiarity of the 
case was that the dreamer with whom we are here concerned was not con- 
tent with the fulfilment of his wish in a dream but knew how to achieve it 
in reality. One feature which cannot fail to strike anyone familiar with the 



E. Representation by Symbols 


391 


psycho-analytic technique of interpretation is the riding whip — which grew 
to an “endless length.” Whips, sticks, lances and similar objects are famil- 
iar to us as phallic symbols; but when a whip further possesses the most 
striking characteristic of a phallus, its extensibility, scarcely a doubt can re- 
main. The exaggeration of the phenomenon, its growing to an “endless 
length,” seems to hint at a hypercathexis 1 from infantile sources. The fact 
that the dreamer took the whip in his hand was a clear allusion to mas- 
turbation, though the reference was not, of course, to the dreamer’s con- 
temporary circumstances but to childish desires in the remote past. The 
interpretation discovered by Dr. Stekel [1909, 466 ff] that in dreams 
“left” stands for what is wrong, forbidden and sinful is much to the point 
here, for it might very well be applied to masturbation carried out in child- 
hood in the face of prohibition. Between this deepest infantile stratum and 
the most superficial one, which was concerned with the statesman’s imme- 
diate plans, it is possible to detect an intermediate layer which was related 
to both the others. The whole episode of a miraculous liberation from 
need by striking a rock and at the same time calling on God as a helper 
bears a remarkable resemblance to the Biblical scene in which Moses 
struck water from a rock for the thirsting Children of Israel. We may un- 
hesitatingly assume that this passage was familiar in all its details to Bis- 
marck, who came of a Bible-loving Protestant family. It would not be 
unlikely that in this time of conflict Bismarck should compare himself 
with Moses, the leader, whom the people he sought to free rewarded with 
rebellion, hatred and ingratitude. Here, then, we should have the connec- 
tion with the dreamer’s contemporary wishes. But on the other hand the 
Bible passage contains some details which apply well to a masturbation 
phantasy. Moses seized the rod in the face of God’s command and the 
Lord punished him for this transgression by telling him that he must die 
without entering the Promised Land. The prohibited seizing of the rod (in 
the dream an unmistakably phallic one), the production of fluid from its 
blow, the threat of death — in these we find all the principal factors of in- 
fantile masturbation united. We may observe with interest the process of 
revision which has welded together these two heterogeneous pictures (orig- 
inating, the one from the mind of a statesman of genius, and the other 


1 [Sachs seems to be using the word simply to mean an ‘additional cathexis’ and 
not in the special sense in which Freud uses it below on pp. 590 £, 599, and 611.] 



392 


VI. The Dream-Work 


from the impulses of the primitive mind of a child) and which has by that 
means succeeded in eliminating all the distressing factors. The fact that 
seizing the rod was a forbidden and rebellious act was no longer indicated 
except symbolically by the “left” hand which performed it. On the other 
hand, God was called on in the manifest content of the dream as though 
to deny as ostentatiously as possible any thought of a prohibition or secret. 
Of the two prophecies made by God to Moses — that he should see the 
Promised Land but that he should not enter it — the first is clearly repre- 
sented as fulfilled (“the view over hills and forests”), while the second, 
highly distressing one was not mentioned at all. The water was probably 
sacrificed to the requirements of secondary revision [cf. pp. 493 f£] , which 
successfully endeavoured to make this scene and the former one into a sin- 
gle unity; instead of water, the rock itself fell. 

‘We should expect that at the end of an infantile masturbation phan- 
tasy, which included the theme of prohibition, the child would wish that 
the people in authority in his environment should learn nothing of what 
had happened. In the dream this wish was represented by its opposite, a 
wish to report to the King immediately what had happened. But this re- 
versal fitted in excellently and quite unobtrusively into the phantasy of 
victory contained in the superficial layer of dream-thoughts and in a por- 
tion of the manifest content of the dream. A dream such as this of victory 
and conquest is often a cover for a wish to succeed in an erotic conquest; 
certain features of the dream, such as, for instance, that an obstacle was 
set in the way of the dreamer’s advance but that after he had made use of 
the extensible whip a broad path opened out, might point in that direc- 
tion, but they afford an insufficient basis for inferring that a definite trend 
of thoughts and wishes of that kind ran through the dream. We have here 
a perfect example of completely successful dream-distortion. Whatever 
was obnoxious in it was worked over so that it never emerged through the 
surface layer that was spread over it as a protective covering. In conse- 
quence of this it was possible to avoid any release of anxiety. The dream 
was an ideal case of a wish successfully fulfilled without infringing the 
censorship; so that we may well believe that the dreamer awoke from it 
“rejoiced and strengthened.’” 

As a last example, here is 



E. Representation by Symbols 


393 


XII 

A Chemist’s Dream [1909] 

This was dreamt by a young man who was endeavouring to give up his 
habit of masturbating in favour of sexual relations with women. 

Preamble. — On the day before he had the dream he had been in- 
structing a student on the subject of Grignard’s reaction, in which magne- 
sium is dissolved in absolutely pure ether through the catalytic action of 
iodine. Two days earlier, when the same reaction was being carried out, an 
explosion had occurred which had burnt the hand of one of the workers. 

Dream. — (I) He was supposed to be making phenyl-magnesium-bromide. 
He saiv the apparatus ivith particular distinctness , but had substituted himself 
for the magnesium. He now found himself in a singularly unstable state. He 
kept on saying to himself: ‘This is all right, things are working, my feet are be- 
ginning to dissolve already, my knees are getting sofi. ’ Then he put out his 
hands and felt his feet. Meanwhile (how, he could not tell) he pulled his legs 
out of the vessel and said to himself once more: ‘This can ’t be right. Yes it is, 
though. ’At this point he partly ivoke up and went through the dream to him- 
self, so as to be able to report it to me. He ivas positively frightened of the so- 
lution 1 of the dream. He felt very much excited during this period of 
semi-sleep and kept repeating: ‘Phenyl, phenyl. ’ 

(II) He was at ing with his whole family and was due to be at the 

Schottentor 2 at half-past eleven to meet a particular lady. But he only ivoke 
at half-past eleven, and said to himself: ‘It’s too late. You can ’t get there before 
half-past tivelve. ’ The next moment he saw the whole family sitting round 
the table; he saw his mother particularly clearly and the maidservant carrying 
the soup-tureen. So he thought: ‘Well, as we’ve started dinner, it’s too late for 
me to go out. ’ 

Analysis. — He had no doubt that even the first part of the dream had 
some connection with the lady whom he was to meet. (He had had the 
dream during the night before the expected rendez-vous.) He thought the 
student to whom he had given the instructions a particularly unpleasant 


1 [German ‘Auflosung’; also the word used above for ‘dissolving.’] 

2 [‘ ing,’ was presumably a suburb ofVienna (see p. 315 £); the Schottentor 

is near the middle of the town.] 




394 


VI. The Dream-Work 


person. He had said to him: ‘That’s not right,’ because the magnesium 
showed no signs of being affected. And the student had replied, as though 
he were quite unconcerned: ‘No, nor it is.’ The student must have stood 
for himself (the patient), who was just as indifferent about the analysis as 
the student was about the synthesis. The ‘he’ in the dream who carried 
out the operation stood for me. How unpleasant I must think him for be- 
ing so indifferent about the result! 

On the other hand, he (the patient) was the material which was being 
used for the analysis (or synthesis). What was in question was the success 
of the treatment. The reference to his legs in the dream reminded him of 
an experience of the previous evening. He had been having a dancing- 
lesson and had met a lady of whom he had been eager to make a conquest. 
He clasped her to himself so tightly that on one occasion she gave a 
scream. As he relaxed his pressure against her legs, he felt her strong re- 
sponsive pressure against the lower part of his thighs as far down as his 
knees — the point mentioned in his dream. So that in this connection it 
was the woman who was the magnesium in the retort — things were work- 
ing at last. He was feminine in relation to me, just as he was masculine in 
relation to the woman. If it was working with the lady it was working with 
him in the treatment. His feeling himself and the sensations in his knees 
pointed to masturbation and fitted in with his fatigue on the previous 
day. — His appointment with the lady had in fact been for half-past eleven. 
His wish to miss it by oversleeping and to stay with his sexual objects at 
home (that is, to keep to masturbation) corresponded to his resistance. 

In connection with his repeating the word ‘phenyl,’ he told me that he 
had always been very fond of all these radicals ending in ‘-yl,’ because they 
were so easy to use: benzyl, acetyl, etc. This explained nothing. But when I 
suggested 1 Schlemihl ’ to him as another radical in the series , 1 he laughed 
heartily and told me that in the course of the summer he had read a book 
by Marcel Prevost in which there was a chapter on ‘Les exclus de I’amour 
which in fact included some remarks upon ‘ les Schlemilies .’ When he read 
them he had said to himself: ‘This is just what I’m like.’ — If he had missed 
the appointment it would have been another example of his ‘Schlemihlness.’ 

It would seem that the occurrence of sexual symbolism in dreams 
has already been experimentally confirmed by some work carried out by 


1 [‘Schlemihl,’ which rhymes with the words ending in ‘-yl,’ is a word of Hebrew 
origin commonly used in German to mean an unlucky, incompetent person.] 




E. Representation by Symbols 


395 


K. Schrotter, on lines proposed by H. Swoboda. Subjects under deep hyp- 
nosis were given suggestions by Schrotter, and these led to the production 
of dreams a large part of whose content was determined by the sugges- 
tions. If he gave a suggestion that the subject should dream of normal or 
abnormal sexual intercourse, the dream, in obeying the suggestion, would 
make use of symbols familiar to us from psycho-analysis in place of the 
sexual material. For instance, when a suggestion was made to a female 
subject that she should dream of having homosexual intercourse with a 
friend, the friend appeared in the dream carrying a shabby hand-bag with 
a label stuck on it bearing the words ‘Ladies only.’ The woman who 
dreamt this was said never to have had any knowledge of symbolism in 
dreams or of their interpretation. Difficulties are, however, thrown in the 
way of our forming an opinion of the value of these interesting experi- 
ments by the unfortunate circumstance that Dr. Schrotter committed sui- 
cide soon after making them. The only record of them is to be found in 
a preliminary communication published in the Zentralblatt fur Psycho- 
analyse {Schrontr, 1912). [1914.] 

Similar findings were published by Roffenstein in 1923. Some experi- 
ments made by Betlheim and Hartmann (1924) were of particular inter- 
est, since they made no use of hypnosis. These experimenters related 
anecdotes of a coarsely sexual character to patients suffering from Kor- 
sakoff s syndrome and observed the distortions which occurred when the 
anecdotes were reproduced by the patients in these confusional states. 
They found that the symbols familiar to us from the interpretation of 
dreams made their appearance (e.g. going upstairs, stabbing and shooting 
as symbols of copulation, and knives and cigarettes as symbols of the pe- 
nis). The authors attached special importance to the appearance of the 
symbol of a staircase, for, as they justly observed, ‘no conscious desire to 
distort could have arrived at a symbol of such a kind.’ [1925.] 

It is only now, after we have properly assessed the importance of sym- 
bolism in dreams that it becomes possible for us to take up the theme of 
typical dreams, which was broken off on p. 293 above. [1914.] I think 
we are justified in dividing such dreams roughly into two classes: those 
which really always have the same meaning, and those which, in spite of 
having the same or a similar content, must nevertheless be interpreted in 
the greatest variety of ways. Among typical dreams of the first class I 
have already [pp. 291 ffi] dealt in some detail with examination dreams. 
[1909.] 



396 


VI. The Dream-Work 


Dreams of missing a train deserve to be put alongside examination 
dreams on account of the similarity of their affect, and their explanation 
shows that we shall be right in doing so. They are dreams of consolation 
for another kind of anxiety felt in sleep — the fear of dying. ‘Departing’ 
on a journey is one of the commonest and best authenticated symbols of 
death. These dreams say in a consoling way: ‘Don’t worry, you won’t die 
(depart),’ just as examination dreams say soothingly: ‘Don’t be afraid, no 
harm will come to you this time either.’ The difficulty of understanding 
both these kinds of dreams is due to the fact that the feeling of anxiety is 
attached precisely to the expression of consolation. [191 1.] 1 

The meaning of dreams ‘with a dental stimulus’ [cf. p. 247], 2 which I 
often had to analyse in patients, escaped me for a long time because, to 
my surprise, there were invariably too strong resistances against their in- 
terpretation. Overwhelming evidence left me at last in no doubt that in 
males the motive force of these dreams was derived from nothing other 
than the masturbatory desires of the pubertal period. I will analyse two 
dreams of this kind, one of which is also a ‘flying dream’. They were both 
dreamt by the same person, a young man with strong homosexual lean- 
ings, which were, however, inhibited in real life. 

He was attending a performance of Fidelio ’ and was sitting in the stalls 
at the Opera beside L., a man who was congenial to him and with whom 
he ivould have liked to make friends. Suddenly he flew through the air 
right across the stalls, put his hand in his mouth and pulled out two of his 
teeth. 

He himself said of the flight that it was as though he was being 
‘thrown’ into the air. Since it was a performance of Fidelio , the words: 

Wer ein holdes Weib errungen . . . 

might have seemed appropriate. But the gaining of even the loveliest 
woman was not among the dreamer’s wishes. Two other lines were more to 
the point: 


1 [In the 1911 edition only, the following sentence appeared at this point: ‘Death 
symbols are dealt with at length in the recently published volume by Stekel 
(1911).’] 

2 [This and the following six paragraphs date from 1909.] 




E. Some Further Typical Dreams 


397 


Wem der grosse Wurf gelungen, 

Eines Freundes Freund zu sein . . .' 

The dream in fact contained this ‘great throw,’ which, however, was not 
only a wish-fulfilment. It also concealed the painful reflection that the 
dreamer had often been unlucky in his attempts at friendship, and had 
been ‘thrown out.’ It concealed, too, his fear that this misfortune might 
be repeated in relation to the young man by whose side he was enjoying 
the performance of Fidelio. And now followed what the fastidious 
dreamer regarded as a shameful confession: that once, after being rejected 
by one of his friends, he had masturbated twice in succession in the state 
of sensual excitement provoked by his desire. 

Here is the second dream: He was being treated by tivo University pro- 
fessors of his acquaintance instead of by me. One of them was doing something 
to his penis. He was afraid of an operation. The other was pushing against his 
mouth with an iron rod; so that he lost one or two of his teeth. He was tied 
up with four silk cloths. 

It can scarcely be doubted that his dream had a sexual meaning. The silk 
cloths identified him with a homosexual whom he knew. The dreamer had 
never carried out coitus and had never aimed at having sexual intercourse 
with men in real life; and he pictured sexual intercourse on the model of 
the pubertal masturbation with which he had once been familiar. 

The many modifications of the typical dream with a dental stimulus 
(dreams, for instance, of a tooth being pulled out by someone else, etc.) 
are, I think, to be explained in the same way . 2 It may, however, puzzle us 


1 [Wem der grosse Wurf gelungen, 

Eines Freundes Freund zu sein, 

Wer ein holdes Weib errungen. . . 

‘He who has won the great throw of becoming the friend of a friend, he who has 
gained a lovely woman . . . !’ These are the opening lines of the second stanza of 
Schiller’s Hymn to Joy, which was set to music by Beethoven in his Choral Sym- 
phony. But the third of these lines (the one first quoted above by Freud) is in fact 
also the opening line of the last section of the final Chorus in Beethoven’s opera 
Fidelio — his librettist having apparently plagiarized Schiller.] 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] A tooth being pulled out by someone else in a dream is as a 
rule to be interpreted as castration (like having one’s hair cut by a barber, according 




398 


VI. The Dream-Work 


to discover how ‘dental stimuli’ have come to have this meaning. But I 
should like to draw attention to the frequency with which sexual repres- 
sion makes use of transpositions from a lower to an upper part of the 
body. 1 Thanks to them it becomes possible in hysteria for all kinds of sen- 
sations and intentions to be put into effect, if not where they properly 
belong — in relation to the genitals, at least in relation to other, unobjec- 
tionable parts of the body. One instance of a transposition of this kind is 
the replacement of the genitals by the face in the symbolism of uncon- 
scious thinking. Linguistic usage follows the same line in recognizing the 
buttocks [‘ Hinterbacken,' literally ‘back-cheeks’] as homologous to the 
cheeks, and by drawing a parallel between the ‘ labia and the lips which 
frame the aperture of the mouth. Comparisons between nose and penis 
are common, and the similarity is made more complete by the presence 
of hair in both places. The one structure which affords no possibility of 
an analogy is the teeth; and it is precisely this combination of similarity 
and dissimilarity which makes the teeth so appropriate for representa- 
tional purposes when pressure is being exercised by sexual repression. 

I cannot pretend that the interpretation of dreams with a dental stim- 
ulus as dreams of masturbation — an interpretation whose correctness 
seems to me beyond doubt — has been entirely cleared up. 2 1 have given 
what explanation I can and must leave what remains unsolved. But I may 
draw attention to another parallel to be found in linguistic usage. In our 
part of the world the act of masturbation is vulgarly described as ‘sich 
einen ausreisseri or ‘ sich einen herunterreissen [literally, ‘pulling one out’ 
or ‘pulling one down’]. 3 I know nothing of the source of this terminology 
or of the imagery on which it is based; but ‘a tooth’ would fit very well 
into the first of the two phrases. 


to Stekel) . A distinction must in general be made between dreams with a dental 
stimulus and dentist dreams, such as those recorded by Coriat (1913). 

1 [Instances of this will be found in the case history of ‘Dora’ (Freud, 1905f). The 
comparison which follows had been drawn by Freud in a letter to Fliess of Jan- 
uary 16, 1899 (Freud, 1950 a. Letter 102).] 

1 [ Footnote added 1909:] A communication by C. G. Jung informs us that dreams 
with a dental stimulus occurring in women have the meaning of birth dreams. — 
[Added 1919:] Ernest Jones [1914b] has brought forward clear confirmation of 
this. The element in common between this interpretation and the one put for- 
ward above lies in the fact that in both cases (castration and birth) what is in 
question is the separation of a part of the body from the whole. 

3 [Footnote added 1911:] Cf. the ‘biographical’ dream on p. 362, n. 2. 




E. Some Further Typical Dreams 


399 


According to popular belief dreams of teeth being pulled out are to be 
interpreted as meaning the death of a relative, but psycho-analysis can at 
most confirm this interpretation only in the joking sense I have alluded 
to above. In this connection, however, I will quote a dream with a dental 
stimulus that has been put at my disposal by Otto Rank. 1 

‘A colleague of mine, who has for some time been taking a lively in- 
terest in the problems of dream-interpretation, has sent me the following 
contribution to the subject of dreams with a dental stimulus. 

‘“A short time ago I had a dream that / was at the dentist’s and he was 
drilling a back tooth in my lower jaiv. He worked on it so long that the tooth 
became useless. He then seized it ivith a forceps and pidled it out ivith an ef- 
fortless ease that excited my astonishment. He told me not to bother about it, 
for it was not the tooth that he was really treating, and put it on the table, 
where the tooth (as it now seemed to me, an upper incisor) fell apart into sev- 
eral layers. I got up from the dentist’s chair, went closer to it with a feeling of 
curiosity, and raised a medical question which interested me. The dentist ex- 
plained to me, ivhile he separated out the various portions of the strikingly 
white tooth and crushed them up (pulverized them) with an instrument, that 
it was connected ivith puberty and that it was only before puberty that teeth 
came out so easily, and that in the case of women the decisive factor was the 
birth of a child. 

‘“I then became aware (while I was half asleep, I believe) that the 
dream had been accompanied by an emission, which I could not attach 
with certainty, however, to any particular part of the dream; 1 was most 
inclined to think that it had already occurred while the tooth was being 
pulled out. 

‘“I then went on to dream of an occurrence which I can no longer re- 
call, but which ended with my leaving my hat and coat somewhere (possibly 
in the dentist’s cloakroom) in the hope that someone would bring them after 
me, and with my hurrying off, dressed only in my overcoat, to catch a train 
which was starting. I succeeded at the last moment in jumping on to the hind- 
most carriage where someone was already standing. I was not able, though, to 
make my way into the inside of the carriage, but ivas obliged to travel in an 
uncomfortable situation from which I tried, successfully in the end, to escape. 


1 [This paragraph and the quotation from Rank which follows were first included 
in 1911. The quotation is from Rank 1911c. Cf. the same dreamer’s staircase 
dream on pp. 380 fi] 




400 


VI. The Dream-Work 


We entered a big tunnel and two trains, going in the opposite direction to us, 
passed through our train as if it were the tunnel. I was looking into a carriage 
window as though I were outside. 

‘“The following experiences and thoughts from the previous day pro- 
vide material for an interpretation of the dream: 

‘“(I.) I had in fact been having dental treatment recently, and at the 
time of the dream I was having continual pain in the tooth in the lower 
jaw which was being drilled in the dream and at which the dentist had, 
again in reality, worked longer than 1 liked. On the morning of the 
dream-day I had once more been to the dentist on account of the pain; 
and he had suggested to me that I should have another tooth pulled out 
in the same jaw as the one he had been treating, saying that the pain 
probably came from this other one. This was a ‘wisdom tooth’ which I 
was cutting just then. I had raised a question touching his medical con- 
science in that connection. 

“‘(II.) On the afternoon of the same day, I had been obliged to apol- 
ogize to a lady for the bad temper I was in owing to my toothache; where- 
upon she had told me she was afraid of having a root pulled out, the 
crown of which had crumbled away almost entirely. She thought that 
pulling out ‘eye-teeth’ was especially painful and dangerous, although on 
the other hand one of her acquaintances had told her that it was easier to 
pull out teeth in the upper jaw, which was where hers was. This acquain- 
tance had also told her that he had once had the wrong tooth pulled out 
under an anaesthetic, and this had increased her dread of the necessary 
operation. She had then asked me whether ‘eye-teeth’ were molars or ca- 
nines, and what was known about them. I pointed out to her on the one 
hand the superstitious element in all these opinions, though at the same 
time I emphasized the nucleus of truth in certain popular views. She was 
then able to repeat to me what she believed was a very old and wide- 
spread popular belief — that if a pregnant woman had toothache she 
would have a boy. 

“‘(III.) This saying interested me in connection with what Freud says 
in his Interpretation of Dreams on the typical meaning of dreams with a 
dental stimulus as substitutes for masturbation, since in the popular say- 
ing (quoted by the lady) a tooth and male genitals (or a boy) were also 
brought into relation with each other. On the evening of the same day, 
therefore, I read through the relevant passage in the Interpretation of 
Dreams and found there amongst other things the following statements 
whose influence upon my dream may be observed just as clearly as that 



E. Some Further Typical Dreams 


401 


of the other two experiences I have mentioned. Freud writes of dreams 
with a dental stimulus that ‘in males the motive force of these dreams was 
derived from nothing other than the masturbatory desires of the pubertal 
period’ [p. 396] . And further: ‘The many modifications of the typical 
dream with a dental stimulus (dreams, for instance, of a tooth being 
pulled out by someone else, etc.) are, I think, to be explained in the same 
way. It may, however, puzzle us to discover how “dental stimuli” should 
have come to have this meaning. But I should like to draw attention to 
the frequency with which sexual repression makes use of transpositions 
from a lower to an upper part of the body.’ (In the present dream from 
the lower jaw to the upper jaw.) ‘Thanks to them it becomes possible in 
hysteria for all kinds of sensations and intentions to be put into effect, if 
not where they properly belong — in relation to the genitals, at least in re- 
lation to other, unobjectionable parts of the body’ [p. 398], And again: 
‘But I may draw attention to another parallel to be found in linguistic us- 
age. In our part of the world the act of masturbation is vulgarly described 
as “ sich einen ausreissen or “ sich einen herunterreissen' [p. 398] . 1 was al- 
ready familiar with this expression in my early youth as a description of 
masturbation, and no experienced dream-interpreter will have any diffi- 
culty in finding his way from here to the infantile material underlying the 
dream. I will only add that the ease with which the tooth in the dream, 
which after its extraction turned into an upper incisor, came out, re- 
minded me of an occasion in my childhood on which I myself pulled out 
a loose upper front tooth easily and without pain. This event, which I can 
still remember clearly today in all its details, occurred at the same early 
period to which my first conscious attempts at masturbation go back. 
(This was a screen memory.) 

“‘Freud’s reference to a statement by C. G. Jung to the effect that 
‘dreams with a dental stimulus occurring in women have the meaning of 
birth dreams’ [p. 398 footnote], as well as the popular belief in the signifi- 
cance of toothache in pregnant women, accounted for the contrast drawn 
in the dream between the decisive factor in the case of females and of 
males (puberty). In this connection I recall an earlier dream of mine which 
I had soon after a visit to the dentist and in which I dreamt that the gold 
crowns which had just been fixed fell out; this annoyed me very much in 
the dream on account of the considerable expense in which I had been in- 
volved and which I had not yet quite got over at the time. This other 
dream now became intelligible to me (in view of a certain experience of 
mine) as a recognition of the material advantages of masturbation over 



402 


VI. The Dream-Work 


object-love: the latter, from an economic point of view, was in every re- 
spect less desirable (cf. the gold crowns) 1 ; and I believe that the lady’s 
remark about the significance of toothache in pregnant women had re- 
awakened these trains of thought in me.” 

‘So much for the interpretation put forward by my colleague, which is 
most enlightening and to which, 1 think, no objections can be raised. I 
have nothing to add to it, except, perhaps, a hint at the probable meaning 
of the second part of the dream. This seems to have represented the 
dreamer’s transition from masturbation to sexual intercourse, which was 
apparently accomplished with great difficulty — (cf. the tunnel through 
which the trains went in and out in various directions) as well as the dan- 
ger of the latter (cf. pregnancy and the overcoat [see p. 208 f.]). The 
dreamer made use for this purpose of the verbal bridges “ Zahn-ziehen 
(. Zug )” and “ Zahn-reissen (Reisen).” 2 

‘On the other hand, theoretically, the case seems to me interesting in 
two respects. In the first place, it brings evidence in favour of Freud’s dis- 
covery that ejaculation in a dream accompanies the act of pulling out a 
tooth. In whatever form the emission may appear, we are obliged to regard 
it as a masturbatory satisfaction brought about without the assistance of 
any mechanical stimulation. Moreover, in this case, the satisfaction accom- 
panying the emission was not, as it usually is, directed to an object, even if 
only to an imaginary one, but had no object, if one may say so; it was 
completely auto-erotic, or at the most showed a slight trace of homosexu- 
ality (in reference to the dentist). 

‘The second point which seems to me to deserve emphasis is the fol- 
lowing. It may plausibly be objected that there is no need at all to regard 
the present case as confirming Freud’s view, since the events of the previ- 
ous day would be sufficient in themselves to make the content of the 
dream intelligible. The dreamer’s visit to the dentist, his conversation with 
the lady and his reading of the Interpretation of Dreams would quite suffi- 
ciently explain how he came to produce this dream, especially as his sleep 
was disturbed by toothache; they would even explain, if need be, how the 
dream served to dispose of the pain which was disturbing his sleep — by 
means of the idea of getting rid of the painful tooth and by simultaneously 


1 [The crown (Krone) was at this time the Austrian monetary unit.] 

1 [‘ Zahn-ziehen = ‘to pull out a tooth’; ‘Zug (from the same root as ‘ ziehen ) = 
‘train’ or ‘pull.’ ‘Zahn-reissen - ‘to pull out a tooth’; 'Reisen (pronounced not 
much unlike 'reissen) = ‘to travel.’] 




E. Some Further Typical Dreams 


403 


drowning with libido the painful sensation which the dreamer feared. But 
even if we make the greatest possible allowance for all this, it cannot be se- 
riously maintained that the mere reading of Freud’s explanations could 
have established in the dreamer the connection between pulling out a 
tooth and the act of masturbation, or could even have put that connection 
into operation, unless it had been laid down long since, as the dreamer 
himself admits it was (in the phrase “sich einen ausreissen ”) . This connec- 
tion may have been revived not only by his conversation with the lady but 
by a circumstance which he reported subsequently. For in reading the /«- 
terpretation of Dreams he had been unwilling, for comprehensible reasons, 
to believe in this typical meaning of dreams with a dental stimulus, and 
had felt a desire to know whether that meaning applied to all dreams of 
that sort. The present dream confirmed the fact that this was so, at least as 
far as he was concerned, and thus showed him why it was that he had been 
obliged to feel doubts on the subject. In this respect too, therefore, the 
dream was the fulfilment of a wish — namely, the wish to convince himself 
of the range of application and the validity of this view of Freud’s.’ 

The second group of typical dreams included those in which the 
dreamer flies or floats in the air, falls, swims, etc. What is the meaning of 
such dreams? It is impossible to give a general reply. As we shall hear, they 
mean something different in every instance; it is only the raw material of 
sensations contained in them which is always derived from the same 
source. [1909.] 

The information provided by psycho-analyses forces me to conclude 
that these dreams, too, reproduce impressions of childhood; they relate, 
that is, to games involving movement, which are extraordinarily attractive 
to children. There cannot be a single uncle who has not shown a child 
how to fly by rushing across the room with him in his outstretched arms, 
or who has not played at letting him fall by riding him on his knee and 
then suddenly stretching out his leg, or by holding him up high and then 
suddenly pretending to drop him. Children are delighted by such experi- 
ences and never tire of asking to have them repeated, especially if there is 
something about them that causes a little fright or giddiness. In after years 
they repeat these experiences in dreams; but in the dreams they leave out 
the hands which held them up, so that they float or fall unsupported. The 
delight taken by young children in games of this kind (as well as in swings 
and see-saws) is well known; when they come to see acrobatic feats in a 
circus their memory of such games is revived. Hysterical attacks in boys 



404 


VI. The Dream-Work 


sometimes consist merely in reproductions of feats of this kind, carried 
out with great skill. It not uncommonly happens that these games of 
movement, though innocent in themselves, give rise to sexual feelings. 
Childish romping [Hetzen], if I may use a word which commonly de- 
scribes all such activities, is what is being repeated in dreams of flying, 
falling, giddiness and so on; while the pleasurable feelings attached to 
these experiences are transformed into anxiety. But, often enough, as 
every mother knows, romping among children actually ends in squab- 
bling and tears. [1900.] 

Thus I have good grounds for rejecting the theory that what provokes 
dreams of flying and falling is the state of our tactile feelings during sleep 
or sensations of the movement of our lungs, and so on. In my view these 
sensations are themselves reproduced as part of the memory to which the 
dream goes back: that is to say, they are part of the content of the dream 
and not its source. [1 900.] 1 

This material, then, consisting of sensations of movement of similar 
kinds and derived from the same source, is used to represent dream- 
thoughts of every possible sort. Dreams of flying or floating in the air (as 
a rule, pleasurably toned) require the most various interpretations; with 
some people these interpretations have to be of an individual character, 
whereas with others they may even be of a typical kind. One of my 
women patients used very often to dream that she was floating at a certain 
height over the street without touching the ground. She was very short, 
and she dreaded the contamination involved in contact with other 
people. Her floating dream fulfilled her two wishes, by raising her feet 
from the ground and lifting her head into a higher stratum of air. In other 
women I have found that flying dreams expressed a desire ‘to be like a 
bird’; while other dreamers became angels during the night because they 
had not been called angels during the day. The close connection of flying 
with the idea of birds explains how it is that in men flying dreams usually 
have a grossly sensual meaning; 2 and we shall not be surprised when we 
hear that some dreamer or other is very proud of his powers of flight. 
[1909.] 


1 [ Footnote added 1930:] These remarks on dreams of movement are repeated 
here, since the present context requires them. See above, pp. 289 f. [where some 
additional footnotes will be found.] 

1 [See p. 581, n. 4.] 




E. Some Further Typical Dreams 


405 


Dr. Paul Federn (of Vienna [and later of New York]) has put forward 1 
the attractive theory that a good number of these flying dreams are 
dreams of erection; for the remarkable phenomenon of erection, around 
which the human imagination has constantly played, cannot fail to be 
impressive, involving as it does an apparent suspension of the laws of 
gravity. (Cf. in this connection the winged phalli of the ancients.) [1911.] 

It is a remarkable fact that Mourly Void, a sober-minded investigator 
of dreams and one who is disinclined to interpretation of any kind, also 
supports the erotic interpretation of flying or floating dreams (Void, 
1910-12, 2, 791). He speaks of the erotic factor as ‘the most powerful 
motive for floating dreams,’ draws attention to the intense feeling of vi- 
bration in the body that accompanies such dreams and points to the fre- 
quency with which they are connected with erections or emissions. 
[1914.] 

Dreams of falling, on the other hand, are more often characterized by 
anxiety. Their interpretation offers no difficulty in the case of women, 
who almost always accept the symbolic use of falling as a way of describ- 
ing a surrender to an erotic temptation. Nor have we yet exhausted the 
infantile sources of dreams of falling. Almost every child has fallen down 
at one time or other and afterwards been picked up and petted; or if he 
has fallen out of his cot at night, has been taken into bed with his mother 
or nurse. [1909.] 

People who have frequent dreams of swimming and who feel great joy 
in cleaving their way through the waves, and so on, have as a rule been 
bed-wetters and are repeating in their dreams a pleasure which they have 
long learnt to forgo. We shall learn presently [pp. 410 ffi] from more than 
one example what it is that dreams of swimming are most easily used to 
represent. [1909.] 

The interpretation of dreams of fire justifies the nursery law which for- 
bids a child to ‘play with fire’ — so that he shall not wet his bed at night. 
For in their case, too, there is an underlying recollection of the enuresis 
of childhood. In my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ 
[1905e, Part II, Dora’s first dream], I have given a complete analysis and 
synthesis of a fire-dream of this kind in connection with the dreamer’s 


1 [At a meeting of the Vienna Psycho-Analytical Society. See his subsequent paper 
on the subject (Federn, 1914, 126).] 




406 


VI. The Dream-Work 


case history, and I have shown what impulses of adult years this infantile 
material can be used to represent. [1911.] 

It would be possible to mention a whole number of other ‘typical’ 
dreams if we take the term to mean that the same manifest dream-content 
is frequently to be found in the dreams of different dreamers. For instance 
we might mention dreams of passing through narrow streets or of walk- 
ing through whole suites of rooms [cf. p. 235], and dreams of burglars — 
against whom, incidentally, nervous people take precautions before they 
go to sleep [cf. p. 413 f.]. Dreams of being pursued by wild animals (or 
by bulls or horses) [cf. p. 419] or of being threatened with knives, daggers 
or lances — these last two classes being characteristic of the manifest con- 
tent of the dreams of people who suffer from anxiety — and many more. 
An investigation specially devoted to this material would thoroughly re- 
pay the labour involved. But instead of this I have two 1 observations to 
make, though these do not apply exclusively to typical dreams. [1909.] 

The more one is concerned with the solution of dreams, the more one 
is driven to recognize that the majority of the dreams of adults deal with 
sexual material and give expression to erotic wishes. A judgement on this 
point can be formed only by those who really analyse dreams, that is to say, 
who make their way through their manifest content to the latent dream- 
thoughts, and never by those who are satisfied with making a note of the 
manifest content alone (like Nacke, for instance, in his writings on sexual 
dreams). Let me say at once that this fact is not in the least surprising but 
is in complete harmony with the principles of my explanation of dreams. 
No other instinct has been subjected since childhood to so much suppres- 


1 [This ‘two’ is a vestige of the 1909 and 1911 editions, in which the whole dis- 
cussion on ‘typical’ dreams was contained in Chapter V. The first observation, 
introduced by a ‘I,’ began with the paragraph which now follows and continued 
to the end of the present Section E — to p. 414. The second observation, intro- 
duced by a ‘II,’ immediately followed; it was the passage beginning on p. 364 
with the words ‘When we have become familiar’ and continuing to the words 
‘another example of his “Schlemihlness”’ on p. 394, with which, in those two 
editions, Chapter V ended. In later editions, of course, both these passages have 
become very greatly enlarged by the accretion of fresh material. In the 1909 edi- 
tion the two observations together only occupied about five pages, as compared 
with forty-two in 1930.] 



E. Some Further Typical Dreams 


407 


sion as the sexual instinct with its numerous components (cf. my Three 
Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, 19O5«0; from no other instinct are so 
many and such powerful unconscious wishes left over, ready to produce 
dreams in a state of sleep. In interpreting dreams we should never forget the 
significance of sexual complexes, though we should also, of course, avoid 
the exaggeration of attributing exclusive importance to them. [1909.] 

We can assert of many dreams, if they are carefully interpreted, that 
they are bisexual, since they unquestionably admit of an ‘over-interpretation’ 
in which the dreamer’s homosexual impulses are realized — impulses, that 
is, which are contrary to his normal sexual activities. To maintain, how- 
ever, as do Stekel (1911, [71]) and Adler (1910, etc.), that all dreams are 
to be interpreted bisexually appears to me to be a generalization which is 
equally undemonstrable and unplausible and which I am not prepared to 
support. In particular, I cannot dismiss the obvious fact that there are nu- 
merous dreams which satisfy needs other than those which are erotic in 
the widest sense of the word: dreams of hunger and thirst, dreams of con- 
venience, etc. So, too, such statements as that ‘the spectre of death is to 
be found behind every dream’ (Stekel [1911, 34]), or that ‘every dream 
shows an advance from the feminine to the masculine line’ (Adler [1910]), 
appear to me to go far beyond anything that can be legitimately main- 
tained in dream-interpretation. [1911.] 

The assertion that all dreams require a sexual interpretation, against 
which critics rage so incessantly, occurs nowhere in my Interpretation of 
Dreams. It is not to be found in any of the numerous editions of this book 
and is in obvious contradiction to other views expressed in it. [19 19.] 1 
I have already shown elsewhere [pp. 206 f£] that strikingly innocent 
dreams may embody crudely erotic wishes, and I could confirm this by 
many new instances. But it is also true that many dreams which appear 
to be indifferent and which one would not regard as in any respect pecu- 
liar lead back on analysis to wishful impulses which are unmistakably sex- 
ual and often of an unexpected sort. Who, for instance, would have 
suspected the presence of a sexual wish in the following dream before it 
had been interpreted? The dreamer gave this account of it: Standing back 
a little behind tivo stately palaces was a little house ivith closed doors. My wife 
led me along the piece of street lip to the little house and pushed the door open; 
I then slipped quickly and easily into the inside of a court which rose in an 


1 [This point is more fully dealt with on p. 194, footnote.] 




408 


VI. The Dream-Work 


incline. Anyone, however, who has had a litde experience in translating 
dreams will at once reflect that penetrating into narrow spaces and open- 
ing closed doors are among the commonest sexual symbols, and will eas- 
ily perceive in this dream a representation of an attempt at coitus a tergo 
(between the two stately buttocks of the female body). The narrow pas- 
sage rising in an incline stood, of course, for the vagina. The assistance at- 
tributed by the dreamer to his wife forces us to conclude that in reality it 
was only consideration for her that restrained the dreamer from making 
attempts of this kind. It turned out that on the dream-day a girl had 
come to live in the dreamer’s household who had attracted him and had 
given him the impression that she would raise no great objections to an 
approach of that kind. The little house between the two palaces was a 
reminiscence of the Hradshin [Citadel] in Prague and was a further ref- 
erence to the same girl, who came from that place. [1909.] 

When I insist to one of my patients on the frequency of Oedipus 
dreams, in which the dreamer has sexual intercourse with his own 
mother, he often replies: ‘I have no recollection of having had any such 
dream.’ Immediately afterwards, however, a memory will emerge of some 
other inconspicuous and indifferent dream, which the patient has dreamt 
repeatedly. Analysis then shows that this is in fact a dream with the same 
content — once more an Oedipus dream. I can say with certainty that dis- 
guised dreams of sexual intercourse with the dreamer’s mother are many 
times more frequent than straightforward ones. [1909. ]' 


1 [Footnote added 1911:] I have published elsewhere a typical example of a dis- 
guised Oedipus dream of this kind. [Freud 1910/; now reprinted at the end of 
this footnote.] Another example, with a detailed analysis, has been published by 
Otto Rank (191 la). — [Added 1914:] For some other disguised Oedipus dreams, 
in which eye-symbolism is prominent, see Rank (1913). Other papers on eye- 
dreams and eye-symbolism, by Eder [1913], Ferenczi [1913] and Reitler 
[1913 a] will be found in the same place. The blinding in the legend of Oedipus, 
as well as elsewhere, stands for castration . — [Added 1911:] Incidentally, the sym- 
bolic interpretation of undisguised Oedipus dreams was not unknown to the an- 
cients. Rank (1910, 534) writes: ‘Thus Julius Caesar is reported to have had a 
dream of sexual intercourse with his mother which was explained by the dream- 
interpreters as a favourable augury for his taking possession of the earth (Mother 
Earth). The oracle given to the Tarquins is equally well known, which prophe- 
sied that the conquest of Rome would fall to that one of them who should first 
kiss his mother ( “oscidum matri tulerif). This was interpreted by Brutus as re- 
ferring to Mother Earth. (“Terram osculo contigit, scilicet quod ea communis mater 




E. Some Further Typical Dreams 


409 


In some dreams of landscapes or other localities emphasis is laid in the 
dream itself on a convinced feeling of having been there once before. (Oc- 
currences of ‘i deja vii in dreams have a special meaning. 1 ) These places are 


omnium mortalium esset.” [“He kissed the earth, saying it was the common 
mother of all mortals.”] Livy, I, 56.)’ — \Added 1914:] Compare in this connec- 
tion the dream of Hippias reported by Herodotus (VI, 107 [Trans. 1922, 259]): 
‘As for the Persians, they were guided to Marathon by Hippias son of Pisistratus. 
Hippias in the past night had seen a vision in his sleep wherein he thought that 
he lay with his own mother; he interpreted this dream to signify that he should 
return to Athens and recover his power, and so die an old man in his own 
mother-country.’ — [ Added 1911:] These myths and interpretations reveal a true 
psychological insight. I have found that people who know that they are preferred 
or favoured by their mother give evidence in their lives of a peculiar self-reliance 
and an unshakable optimism which often seem like heroic attributes and bring 
actual success to their possessors. 

[This reprint of the short paper by Freud (1910/) which is mentioned at the be- 
ginning of the present footnote was added here in 1925:] 

‘Typical Example of a Disguised Oedipus Dream: A man dreamt that he 
had a secret liaison with a lady whom someone else wanted to marry. He was worried 
in case this other man might discover the liaison and the proposed marriage come to 
nothing. He therefore behaved in a very affectionate way to the man. He embraced 
him and kissed him. — There was only one point of contact between the content 
of this dream and the facts of the dreamer’s life. He had a secret liaison with a 
married woman; and an ambiguous remark made by her husband, who was a 
friend of his, led him to suspect that the husband might have noticed some- 
thing. But in reality there was something else involved, all mention of which was 
avoided in the dream but which alone provided a key to its understanding. The 
husband’s life was threatened by an organic illness. His wife was prepared for the 
possibility of his dying suddenly, and the dreamer was consciously occupied with 
an intention to marry the young widow after her husband’s death. This external 
situation placed the dreamer in the constellation of the Oedipus dream. His 
wish was capable of killing the man in order to get the woman as his wife. The 
dream expressed this wish in a hypocritically distorted form. Instead of her being 
married already, he made out that someone else wanted to marry her, which cor- 
responded to his own secret intentions; and his hostile wishes towards her hus- 
band were concealed behind demonstrations of affection which were derived 
from his memory of his relations with his own father in childhood.’ [Hypocrit- 
ical dreams are discussed on pp. 169 n. and 477 ff.] 

1 [This last sentence was interpolated in 1914. The phenomenon oHdeja vu in 
general is discussed by Freud in Chapter XII (D) of his Psychopathology of Every- 
day Life (1901 b) and in another short paper (Freud, 1914a). See also below 
p. 454.] 




410 


VI. The Dream-Work 


invariably the genitals of the dreamer’s mother; there is indeed no other 
place about which one can assert with such conviction that one has been 
there once before. [1909.] 

On one occasion only I was perplexed by an obsessional neurotic who 
told me a dream in which he was visiting a house that he had been in 
twice before. But this particular patient had told me a considerable time 
before of an episode during his sixth year. On one occasion he had been 
sharing his mother’s bed and misused the opportunity by inserting his 
finger into her genitals while she was asleep. [1914.] 

A large number of dreams, 1 2 often accompanied by anxiety and having 
as their content such subjects as passing through narrow spaces or being 
in water, are based upon phantasies of intra-uterine life, of existence in 
the womb and of the act of birth. What follows was the dream of a young 
man who, in his imagination, had taken advantage of an intra-uterine op- 
portunity of watching his parents copulating. 

He was in a deep pit ivith a window in it like the one in the Semmering 
Tunnel. 1 At first he saw an empty landscape through the ivindow, but then 
invented a picture to fit the space, which immediately appeared and filled in 
the gap. The picture represented a field ivhich ivas being ploughed up deeply 
by some implement; and the fresh air together with the idea of hard work 
which accompanied the scene, and the blue-black clods of earth, produced a 
lovely impression. He then went oti further and saw a book upon education 
open in front of him . . . and was surprised that so much attention was de- 
voted in it to the sexual feelings ( of children); and this led him to think of me. 

And here is a pretty water dream, dreamt by a woman patient, which 
served a special purpose in the treatment. At her summer holiday resort, by 

the Lake of she dived into the dark water just ivhere the pale tnoon was 

mirrored in it. 

Dreams like this one are birth dreams. Their interpretation is reached 
by reversing the event reported in the manifest dream; thus, instead of 
‘diving into the water’ we have ‘coming out of the water,’ i.e. being born. 3 
We can discover the locality from which a child is born by calling to mind 


1 [This paragraph and the three following ones date from 1909.] 

2 [A tunnel some 70 miles from Vienna on the main line to the southwest.] 

3 [ Footnote added 1914:] For the mythological significance of birth from the water 
see Rank (1909). 




E. Some Further Typical Dreams 


411 


the slang use of the word ‘lune in French [viz. ‘bottom’]. The pale moon 
was thus the white bottom which children are quick to guess that they 
came out of. What was the meaning of the patient’s wishing to be born 
at her summer holiday resort? I asked her and she replied without hesita- 
tion: ‘Isn’t it just as though I had been reborn through the treatment?’ 
Thus the dream was an invitation to me to continue treating her at the 
holiday resort — that is, to visit her there. Perhaps there was a very timid 
hint in it, too, of the patient’s wish to become a mother herself. 1 

I will quote another birth-dream, together with its interpretation, 
from a paper by Ernest Jones [1910 b\. 2 ‘She stood on the sea-shore watching 
a small boy, who seemed to be hers, wading into the water. This he did till the 
water covered him and she could only see his head bobbing up and down near 
the surface. The scene then changed into the crowded hall of an hotel. Her 
husband left her, and she “entered into conversation ivith” a stranger. The 
second half of the dream revealed itself in the analysis as representing a 
flight from her husband and the entering into intimate relations with a 
third person. . . . The first part of the dream was a fairly evident birth- 
phantasy. In dreams as in mythology, the delivery of the child from the 
uterine waters is commonly presented by distortion as the entry of the 
child into water; among many others, the births of Adonis, Osiris, Moses 
and Bacchus are well-known illustrations of this. The bobbing up and 
down of the head into the water at once recalled to the patient the sensa- 
tion of quickening she had experienced in her only pregnancy. Thinking 
of the boy going into the water induced a reverie in which she saw herself 
taking him out of the water, carrying him to a nursery, washing him and 
dressing him, and installing him in her household. 

‘The second half of the dream therefore represented thoughts concern- 
ing the elopement, that belonged to the first half of the underlying latent 


1 [ Footnote 1909:] It was not for a long time that I learned to appreciate the im- 
portance of phantasies and unconscious thoughts about life in the womb. They 
contain an explanation of the remarkable dread that many people have of being 
buried alive; and they also afford the deepest unconscious basis for the belief in 
survival after death, which merely represents a projection into the future of this 
uncanny life before birth. Moreover, the act of birth is the first experience of anxiety, 
and thus the source and prototype of the affect of anxiety. [Cf. a much later discus- 
sion of this in a passage near the beginning of Chapter VIII of Freud’s Inhibi- 
tions, Symptoms and Anxiety (192 Gd).] 

2 [This paragraph and the following one were added in 1914.] 




412 


VI. The Dream-Work 


content; the first half of the dream corresponded with the second half of 
the latent content, the birth-phantasy. Besides this inversion in order, fur- 
ther inversions took place in each half of the dream. In the first half the 
child entered the water, and then his head bobbed; in the underlying 
dream-thoughts first the quickening occurred and then the child left the 
water (a double inversion). In the second half her husband left her; in the 
dream-thoughts she left her husband.’ 

Abraham (1909, 22 ff.) has reported another birth-dream, dreamt by 
a young woman who was facing her first confinement. A subterranean 
channel led directly into the water from a place in the floor of her room 
(genital canal — amniotic fluid). She raised a trap-door in the floor and a 
creature dressed in brown fur, very much resembling a seal, promptly ap- 
peared. This creature turned out to be the dreamer’s younger brother, to 
whom she had always been like a mother. [1911.] 

Rank [1912 a] has shown from a series of dreams that birth-dreams 
make use of the same symbolism as dreams with a urinary stimulus. The 
erotic stimulus is represented in the latter as a urinary stimulus; and the 
stratification of meaning in these dreams corresponds to a change that has 
come over the meaning of the symbol since infancy. [1914.] 

This is an appropriate point at which to return to a topic that was bro- 
ken off in an earlier chapter (p. 257): 1 the problem of the part played in the 
formation of dreams by organic stimuli which disturb sleep. Dreams which 
come about under their influence openly exhibit not only the usual ten- 
dency to wish-fulfilment and to serving the end of convenience, but very 
often a perfectly transparent symbolism as well; for it not infrequently hap- 
pens that a stimulus awakens a dreamer after a vain attempt has been made 
to deal with it in a dream under a symbolic disguise. This applies to dreams 
of emission or orgasm as well as to those provoked by a need to micturate 
or defaecate. ‘The peculiar nature of emission dreams not only puts us in a 
position to reveal directly certain sexual symbols which are already known 
as being typical, but which have nevertheless been violently disputed; it also 
enables us to convince ourselves that some apparently innocent situations 
in dreams are no more than a symbolic prelude to crudely sexual scenes. 
The latter are as a rule represented undisguisedly in the relatively rare emis- 
sion dreams, whereas they culminate often enough in anxiety dreams, 
which have the same result of awakening the sleeper.’ [Rank, ibid., 55.] 


1 [This paragraph and the three following ones date from 1919.] 




E. Some Further Typical Dreams 


413 


The symbolism of dreams with a urinary stimulus is especially trans- 
parent and has been recognized from the earliest times. The view was al- 
ready expressed by Hippocrates that dreams of fountains and springs 
indicate a disorder of the bladder (Havelock Ellis [1911, 164]). Schemer 
[1861, 189] studied the multiplicity of the symbolism of urinary stimuli 
and asserted that ‘any urinary stimulus of considerable strength invariably 
passes over into stimulation of the sexual regions and symbolic represen- 
tations of them. . . . Dreams with a urinary stimulus are often at the same 
time representatives of sexual dreams.’ [Ibid., 192.] 

Otto Rank, whose discussion in his paper on the stratification of sym- 
bols in arousal dreams [Rank, 1912 a] I am here following, has made it 
seem highly probable that a great number of dreams with a urinary stim- 
ulus have in fact been caused by a sexual stimulus which has made a first 
attempt to find satisfaction regressively in the infantile form of urethral 
erotism. [Ibid., 78.] Those cases are particularly instructive in which the 
urinary stimulus thus set up leads to awakening and emptying the blad- 
der, but in which the dream is nevertheless continued and the need then 
expressed in undisguisedly erotic imagery. 1 

Dreams with an intestinal stimulus throw light in an analogous fash- 
ion on the symbolism involved in them, and at the same time confirm the 
connection between gold and faeces which is also supported by copious 
evidence from social anthropology. (See Freud, 1908 b\ Rank, 191 2zz; 
Dattner, 1913; and Reik, 1915.) ‘Thus, for instance, a woman who was 
receiving medical treatment for an intestinal disorder dreamt of someone 
who was burying a treasure in the neighbourhood of a little wooden hut 
which looked like a rustic out-door closet. There was a second part to the 
dream in which she was wiping the behind of her little girl who had 
dirted herself.’ [Rank, 1912 a, 55.] 

Rescue dreams are connected with birth dreams. In women’s dreams, 
to rescue, and especially to rescue from the water, has the same significance 


1 [ Footnote 1919:] ‘The same symbols which occur in their infantile aspect in 
bladder dreams, appear with an eminently sexual meaning in their “recent” as- 
pects: Water = urine = semen = amniotic fluid; ship = “pump ship” (micturate) 
= uterus (box); to get wet = enuresis = copulation = pregnancy; to swim = full 
bladder = abode of the unborn; rain = micturate = symbol of fertility; travel 
(starting, getting out) = getting out of bed = sexual intercourse (honeymoon); 
micturate = emission.’ (Rank, 1912a, 95.) 



414 


VI. The Dream-Work 


as giving birth; but the meaning is modified if the dreamer is a man. 1 

[1911.] 

Robbers, burglars and ghosts, of whom some people feel frightened be- 
fore going to bed, and who sometimes pursue their victims after they are 
asleep, all originate from one and the same class of infantile reminiscence. 
They are the nocturnal visitors who rouse children and take them up to 
prevent their wetting their beds, or who lift the bedclothes to make sure 
where they have put their hands in their sleep. Analyses of some of these 
anxiety-dreams have made it possible for me to identify these nocturnal 
visitors more precisely. In every case the robbers stood for the sleeper’s fa- 
ther, whereas the ghosts corresponded to female figures in white night- 
gowns. [1909.] 


(F) 

SOME EXAMPLES— CALCULATIONS AND 
SPEECHES IN DREAMS 2 

Before assigning the fourth of the factors which govern the formation 
of dreams to its proper place [cf. pp. 493 ffi], I propose to quote a number 
of examples from my collection. These will serve partly to illustrate the in- 
terplay between the three factors already known to us and partly to provide 
confirmatory evidence for what have hitherto been unsupported assertions 
or to indicate some conclusions which inevitably follow from them. In 
giving an account of the dream-work, I have found very great difficulty 
in backing my findings by examples. Instances in support of particular 


1 \Footnote 1911:] A dream of this kind has been reported by Pfister (1909). For 
the symbolic meaning of rescuing see Freud, 1910 d, and Freud, 1910 h. [ Added 
1914:] See also Rank (191 lb) and Reik (191 1). [ Added 1919:] See further, Rank 
(1914). [A dream of rescue from the water will be found in the second case dis- 
cussed by Freud in his paper on ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (1922 a).] 

2 [As in the case of Section E, a large part of the first half of the present section 
was added to the work in its later editions. The date of the first inclusion of each 
paragraph will accordingly be found attached to it in square brackets. The sec- 
ond half of the section (from p. 423 onwards) dates from the first edition. — 
Another collection of examples of dream-analyses will be found in the twelfth of 
Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916-17).] 



F. Some Examples 


415 


propositions carry conviction only if they are treated in the context of the 
interpretation of a dream as a whole. If they are torn from their context 
they lose their virtue; while, on the other hand, a dream-interpretation 
which is carried even a little way below the surface quickly becomes so vo- 
luminous as to make us lose the thread of the train of thought which it was 
designed to illustrate. This technical difficulty must serve as my excuse if 
in what follows I string together all sorts of things, whose only common 
bond is their connection with the contents of the preceding sections of this 
chapter. [1900.] 

I will begin by giving a few instances of peculiar or unusual modes of 
representation in dreams. 

A lady had the following dream: A servant girl was standing on a ladder 
as if she were cleaning a ivindow, and had a chimpanzee ivith her and a 
gorilla-cat (the dreamer afterwards corrected this to an angora cat). She 
hurled the animals at the dreamer; the chimpanzee cuddled up to her, which 
ivas very disgusting. — This dream achieved its purpose by an extremely 
simple device: it took a figure of speech literally and gave an exact repre- 
sentation of its wording. ‘Monkey,’ and animals’ names in general, are 
used as invectives; and the situation in the dream meant neither more nor 
less than ‘hurling invectives.’ In the course of the present series of dreams 
we shall come upon a number of other instances of the use of this simple 
device during the dream-work. [1900.] 

Another dream adopted a very similar procedure. A woman had a child 
ivith a remarkably deformed skull. The dreamer had heard that the child had 
grown like that owing to its position in the uterus. The doctor said that the 
skidl might be given a better shape by compression, but that that ivould dam- 
age the child’s brain. She reflected that as he was a boy it woidd do him less 
harm. — This dream contained a plastic representation of the abstract 
concept of ‘impressions on children’ which the dreamer had met with in 
the course of the explanations given her during her treatment. [1900.] 

The dream-work adopted a slightly different method in the following 
instance. The dream referred to an excursion to the Hilmteich 1 near Graz. 
The weather outside was fearful. There was a wretched hotel, ivater was drip- 
ping from the walls of the room, the bedclothes were damp. (The latter part 
of the dream was reported less directly than I have given it.) The meaning 
of the dream was ‘superfluous.’ This abstract idea, which was present in 


1 [A stretch of water in the outskirts of the town.] 




416 


VI. The Dream-Work 


the dream-thoughts, was in the first instance given a somewhat forced 
twist and put into some such form as ‘overflowing,’ ‘flowing over’ or 
‘fluid’ — after which it was represented in a number of similar pictures: wa- 
ter outside, water on the walls inside, water in the dampness of the bed- 
clothes — everything flowing or ‘overflowing.’ [1900.] 

We shall not be surprised to find that, for the purpose of representation 
in dreams, the spelling of words is far less important than their sound, es- 
pecially when we bear in mind that the same rule holds good in rhyming 
verse. Rank (1910, 482) has recorded in detail, and analysed very fully, a 
girl’s dream in which the dreamer described how she was walking through 
the fields and cutting off rich ears [Ahren] of barley and wheat. A friend 
of her youth came towards her, but she tried to avoid meeting him. The 
analysis showed that the dream was concerned with a kiss — an ‘hon- 
ourable kiss’ [Kuss in Ehreri pronounced the same as ‘ Ahren ,’ literally, ‘kiss 
in honour’] 1 . In the dream itself the ‘ Ahren ,’ which had to be cut off, not 
pulled off, figured as ears of corn, while, condensed with ‘Ehren,’ they 
stood for a whole number of other [latent] thoughts. [1911.] 

On the other hand, in other cases, the course of linguistic evolution has 
made things very easy for dreams. For language has a whole number of 
words at its command which originally had a pictorial and concrete sig- 
nificance, but are used today in a colourless and abstract sense. All that the 
dream need do is to give these words their former, full meaning or to go 
back a little way to an earlier phase in their development. A man had a 
dream, for instance, of his brother being in a Kasten [‘box’] . In the course 
of interpretation the Kasten was replaced by a Schrank [‘cupboard’ — also 
used abstractly for ‘barrier,’ ‘restriction’]. The dream-thought had been to 
the effect that his brother ought to restrict himself [sich einschrdnken ] — 
instead of the dreamer doing so. 2 [1909.] 

Another man dreamt that he climbed to the top of a mountain which 
commanded a quite unusually extensive view. Here he was identifying 
himself with a brother of his who was the editor of a survey which dealt 
with far Eastern affairs. [1911.] 


1 [The reference is to a German proverb: ‘ Einen Kass in Ehreit kann niemand ver- 
wehren (‘No one can refuse an honourable kiss’). The dreamer had in reality been 
given her first kiss as she was walking through a cornfield — a kiss among the ears 
of corn.] 

2 [This instance and the next are also quoted (with somewhat different comments) 
in respectively the seventh and eighth of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916-17).] 




F. Some Examples 


417 


In Der Griine Heinrich 1 a dream is related in which a mettlesome horse 
was rolling about in a beautiful field of oats, each grain of which was ‘a 
sweet almond, a raisin and a new penny piece . . . wrapped up together in 
red silk and tied up with a bit of pig’s bristle.’ The author (or dreamer) 
gives us an immediate interpretation of this dream-picture: the horse felt 
agreeably tickled and called out ‘Der Hafer sticht mich!’ 1 2 [1914.] 

According to Henzen [1890] dreams involving puns and turns of 
speech occur particularly often in the old Norse sagas, in which scarcely a 
dream is to be found which does not contain an ambiguity or a play upon 
words. [1914.] 

It would be a work in itself to collect these modes of representation 
and to classify them according to their underlying principles. [1909.] 
Some of these representations might almost be described as jokes, and 
they give one a feeling that one would never have understood them with- 
out the dreamer’s help. [1911.] 

(1) A man dreamt that he was asked someone’s name, but could not 
think of it. He himself explained that what this meant was that ‘he would 
never dream of such a thing.’ [1911.] 

(2) 3 A woman patient told me a dream in which all the people ivere es- 
pecially big. ‘That means,’ she went on, ‘that the dream must be to do 
with events in my early childhood, for at that time, of course, all grown- 
up people seemed to me enormously big.’ [Cf. p. 62 ».] She herself did 
not appear in the content of this dream. — The fact of a dream referring 
to childhood may also be expressed in another way, namely by a transla- 
tion of time into space. The characters and scenes are seen as though they 
were at a great distance, at the end of a long road, or as though they were 
being looked at through the wrong end of a pair of opera-glasses. [1911.] 

(3) A man who in his working life tended to use abstract and indefi- 
nite phraseology, though he was quite sharp-witted in general, dreamt on 
one occasion that he arrived at a raihvay station just as a train was coming 


1 [Part IV, Chapter 6, of Gottfried Keller’s novel.] 

2 [Literally: ‘The oats are pricking me,’ but with the idiomatic meaning of ‘Pros- 
perity has spoiled me.’] 

3 [This and the two following examples were first published in a short paper, 
‘ Nachtrdge zur Traumdeutung (Freud, 1911a). See above, p. 373 n.\ 




418 


VI. The Dream-Work 


in. What then happened ivas that the platform moved towards the train, 
while the train stopped still — an absurd reversal of what actually happens. 
This detail was no more than an indication that we should expect to find 
another reversal in the dream’s content. [Cf. p. 341.] The analysis of the 
dream led to the patient’s recollecting some picture-books in which there 
were illustrations of men standing on their heads and walking on their 
hands. [191 1.] 

(4) Another time the same dreamer told me a short dream which was 
almost reminiscent of the technique of a rebus. He dreamt that his uncle 
gave him a kiss in an automobile. He went on at once to give me the inter- 
pretation, which 1 myself would never have guessed: namely that it meant 
auto-erotism. The content of this dream might have been produced as a 
joke in waking life. 1 [1911.] 

(5) A man dreamt that he ivas pulling a ivoman out from behind a bed. 
The meaning of this was that he was giving her preference. 2 (1914.) 

(6) A man dreamt that he ivas an officer sitting at a table opposite the 
Emperor. This meant that he was putting himself in opposition to his 
father. [1914.] 

(7) A man dreamt that he was treating someone for a broken limb. The 
analysis showed that the broken bone [‘ Knochenbruch’} stood for a broken 
marriage [‘ Ehebruchf properly ‘adultery’] . 3 [1914.] 

(8) The time of day in dreams very often stands for the age of the 
dreamer at some particular period in his childhood. Thus, in one dream, 


1 [‘Auto’ is the ordinary German word for ‘motor-car.’ — This dream is reported 
in slightly different terms in Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916-17), Lecture 
XV.] 

2 [The point here is a purely verbal one, depending on the similarity of the Ger- 
man words for ‘pulling out’ (‘ hervorziehen) and ‘giving preference to’ 
(‘ vorziehen) . This dream is also quoted in Freud, Introductory Lectures (1916- 
17), Lecture VII. Nos. 5, 6, 8 and 9 of the present set of examples were pub- 
lished first in Freud, 1913A] 

3 [This example is also quoted in Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916-17), Lecture 
XI, where, in a footnote, a ‘symptomatic act’ is reported, which confirms this 
particular interpretation.] 




F. Some Examples 


419 


‘a quarter past five in the morning’ meant the age of five years and three 
months, which was significant, since that was the dreamer’s age at the 
time of the birth of his younger brother. [1914.] 

(9) Here is another method of representing ages in a dream. A woman 
dreamt that she was walking with two little girls whose ages differed by fifteen 
months. She was unable to recall any family of her acquaintance to whom 
this applied. She herself put forward the interpretation that the two chil- 
dren both represented herself and that the dream was reminding her that 
the two traumatic events of her childhood were separated from each other 
by precisely that interval. One had occurred when she was three and a 
half, the other when she was four and three-quarters. [1914.] 

(10) It is not surprising that a person undergoing psycho-analytic 
treatment should often dream of it and be led to give expression in his 
dreams to the many thoughts and expectations to which the treatment 
gives rise. The imagery most frequently chosen to represent it is that of a 
journey, usually by motor-car, as being a modern and complicated vehicle. 
The speed of the car will then be used by the patient as an opportunity 
for giving vent to ironical comments. — If ‘the unconscious,’ as an element 
in the subject’s waking thoughts, has to be represented in a dream, it may 
be replaced very appropriately by subterranean regions. — These, where 
they occur without any reference to analytic treatment, stand for the fe- 
male body or the womb. — ‘Down below’ in dreams often relates to the 
genitals, ‘up above,’ on the contrary, to the face, mouth or breast. — Wild 
beasts are as a rule employed by the dream-work to represent passionate 
impulses of which the dreamer is afraid, whether they are his own or those 
of other people. (It then needs only a slight displacement for the wild 
beasts to come to represent the people who are possessed by these pas- 
sions. We have not far to go from here to cases in which a dreaded father 
is represented by a beast of prey or a dog or wild horse — a form of repre- 
sentation recalling totemism.) 1 It might be said that the wild beasts are 
used to represent the libido, a force dreaded by the ego and combated by 
means of repression. It often happens, too, that the dreamer separates off 
his neurosis, his ‘sick personality,’ from himself and depicts it as an inde- 
pendent person. [1919.] 


1 [See Freud, Totem and Taboo (1912-13), Chapter IV, Section 3.] 




420 


VI. The Dream-Work 


(11) Here is an example recorded by Hanns Sachs (1911): ‘We know 
from Freud’s Interpretation of Dreams that the dream-work makes use of 
different methods for giving a sensory form to words or phrases. If, for in- 
stance, the expression that is to be represented is an ambiguous one, the 
dream-work may exploit the fact by using the ambiguity as a switch-point: 
where one of the meanings of the word is present in the dream-thoughts 
the other one can be introduced into the manifest dream. This was the case 
in the following short dream in which ingenious use was made for repre- 
sentational purposes of appropriate impressions of the previous day. I was 
suffering from a cold on the “dream-day,” and I had therefore decided in 
the evening that, if I possibly could, I would avoid getting out of bed dur- 
ing the night. I seemed in the dream merely to be continuing what I had 
been doing during the day. I had been engaged in sticking press-cuttings 
into an album and had done my best to put each one in the place where it 
belonged. I dreamt that I was trying to paste a cutting into the album. But it 
wouldn’t go on to the page fergeht nicht auf die Seite”), which caused me 
much pain. I woke up and became aware that the pain in the dream per- 
sisted in the form of a pain in my inside, and I was compelled to abandon 
the decision I had made before going to bed. My dream, in its capacity of 
guardian of my sleep, had given me the illusion of a fulfilment of my wish 
to stop in bed, by means of a plastic representation of the ambiguous phrase 
“er geht nicht auf die Seite ” [“he isn’t going to the lavatory”].’ [1914.] 

We can go so far as to say that the dream-work makes use, for the pur- 
pose of giving a visual representation of the dream-thoughts, of any meth- 
ods within its reach, whether waking criticism regards them as legitimate 
or illegitimate. This lays the dream-work open to doubt and derision on 
the part of everyone who has only heard of dream-interpretation but 
never practised it. Stekel’s book, Die Sprache des Traumes (1911), is par- 
ticularly rich in examples of this kind. I have, however, avoided quoting 
instances from it, on account of the author’s lack of critical judgement 
and of the arbitrariness of his technique, which give rise to doubts even 
in unprejudiced minds. [Cf. p. 363 £] [1919.] 

(12) [1914.] The following examples are taken from a paper by 
V. Tausk (1914) on the use of clothes and colours in dreaming. 

{a) A. dreamt of seeing a former governess of his in a dress of black luster 
[‘ Luster] which fitted very tight across her buttocks. — This was explained as 
meaning that the governess was lustful [‘liistern’]. 



F. Some Examples 


421 


(i b ) C. dreamt of seeing a girl on the Road, ivho was bathed in 

white light and was ivearing a white blouse. — The dreamer had had inti- 
mate relations with a Miss White for the first time on this road. 

(c) Frau D. dreamt of seeing the eighty-year-old Viennese actor Blasel ly- 
ing on a sofa in full armour [‘in voller Riistung’]. He began jumping over 
tables and chairs, drew a dagger, looked at himself in the looking-glass and 
brandished the dagger in the air as though he was fighting an imaginary 
enemy. — Interpretation: The dreamer suffered from a long-standing af- 
fection of the bladder [Blase] . She lay on a sofa for her analysis; when she 
looked at herself in a looking-glass, she thought privately that in spite of 
her age and illness she still looked hale and hearty [riistig], 

(13) [1919.] A ‘Great Achievement’ in a Dream. — A man dreamt 
that he was a pregnant woman lying in bed. He found the situation very dis- 
agreeable. He called out: ‘I’d rather be . . .’ (during the analysis, after calling 
to mind a nurse, he completed the sentence with the words ‘breaking 
stones’). Behind the bed there ivas hanging a map, the bottom edge of which 
was kept stretched by a strip of ivood. He tore the strip of wood down by catching 
hold of its two ends. It did not break across but split into tivo halves lengthways. 
This action relieved him and at the same time helped on delivery. 

Without any assistance he interpreted tearing down the strip [Leiste] 
as a great achievement [Leistung] . He was escaping from his uncomfort- 
able situation (in the treatment) by tearing himself out of his feminine 
attitude. . . . The absurd detail of the strip of wood not simply breaking 
but splitting lengthways was explained thus: the dreamer recalled that this 
combination of doubling and destroying was an allusion to castration. 
Dreams very often represent castration by the presence of two penis sym- 
bols as the defiant expression of an antithetical wish [cf. p. 370]. Inciden- 
tally, the ‘ Leiste ’ [‘groin’] is a part of the body in the neighbourhood of 
the genitals. The dreamer summed up the interpretation of the dream as 
meaning that he had got the better of the threat of castration which had 
led to his adopting a feminine attitude. 1 


1 [This example was first published as a separate paper (1914e). In reprinting it 
here, Freud omitted a passage, which occurred originally after the words ‘by tear- 
ing himself out of his feminine attitude.’ The omitted passage (which has never 
been reprinted) deals with Silberer’s ‘functional phenomenon,’ discussed below, 
on pp. 507 ff. It ran as follows: ‘No objection can be made to this interpretation 
of the patient’s; but I would not describe it as “functional” simply because his 




422 


VI. The Dream-Work 


(14) [1919.] In an analysis which I was conducting in French a dream 
came up for interpretation in which I appeared as an elephant. I naturally 
asked the dreamer why I was represented in that form. ‘ Vons me trompez 
[‘you are deceiving me’] was his reply (‘ trompe = ‘trunk’). 

The dream-work can often succeed in representing very refractory ma- 
terial, such as proper names, by a far-fetched use of out-of-the-way asso- 
ciations. In one of my dreams old Brilcke 1 had set me the task of making a 
dissection; . . . I fished something out that looked like a piece of crumpled 
silver-paper. (I shall return to this dream later [see pp. 459 ff.].) The asso- 
ciation to this (at which I arrived with some difficulty) was ‘stanniol.’ 2 I 
then perceived that I was thinking of the name of Stannius, the author of 
a dissertation on the nervous system of fish, which I had greatly admired 
in my youth. The first scientific task which my teacher [Briicke] set me 
was in fact concerned with the nervous system of a fish, Ammocoetes 
[Freud, 18 77 a\. It was clearly impossible to make use of the name of this 
fish in a picture puzzle. [1900]. 

At this point I cannot resist recording a very peculiar dream, which 
also deserves to be noticed as having been dreamt by a child, and which 
can easily be explained analytically. ‘I remember having often dreamt 
when I was a child,’ said a lady, ‘that God wore a paper cocked-hat on his 
head. I used very often to have a hat of that sort put on my head at meals, 
to prevent my being able to look at the other children’s plates, to see how 
big their helpings were. As I had heard that God was omniscient, the 


dream-thoughts related to his attitude in the treatment. Thoughts of that kind 
serve as “material” for the construction of dreams like anything else. It is hard to 
see why the thoughts of a person under analysis should not be concerned with 
his behaviour during treatment. [Cf. also p. 236, n. 3.] The distinction between 
“material” and “functional” phenomena in Silberer’s sense is of significance only 
where — as was the case in Silberer’s well-known self-observations as he was 
falling asleep [see pp. 358 ff.] — there is an alternative between the subject’s at- 
tention being directed either to some piece of thought-content present in his 
mind or to his own actual psychical state, and not where that state itself consti- 
tutes the content of his thoughts.’ Freud also remarked in parenthesis that in any 
case the ‘absurd detail of the strip of wood not simply breaking but splitting 
lengthways’ could not be ‘functional.’] 

1 [See footnote, p. 487.] 

2 [Silver paper = tin-foil; stanniol is a derivative of tin (stannium).] 




F. Calculations in Dreams 


423 


meaning of the dream was that I knew everything — even in spite of the 
hat that had been put on my head.’ 1 [1909.] 

The nature of the dream-work 2 and the way in which it plays about 
with its material, the dream-thoughts, are instructively shown when we 
come to consider numbers and calculations that occur in dreams. More- 
over, numbers in dreams are regarded superstitiously as being especially 
significant in regard to the future. 3 I shall therefore select a few instances 
of this kind from my collection. 


I 

Extract from a dream dreamt by a lady shortly before her treatment 
came to an end: She was going to pay for something. Her daughter took 3 
florins and 65 kreuzers from her ( the mother’s) purse. The dreamer said to 
her: ‘What are you doing ? It only costs 21 kreuzers. ’ 4 Owing to my knowl- 
edge of the dreamer’s circumstances, this bit of dream was intelligible to 
me without any further explanation on her part. The lady came from 
abroad and her daughter was at school in Vienna. She was in a position 
to carry on her treatment with me as long as her daughter remained in 
Vienna. The girl’s school year was due to end in three weeks and this also 
meant the end of the lady’s treatment. The day before the dream, the 
head-mistress had asked her whether she would not consider leaving her 
daughter at school for another year. From this suggestion she had evi- 
dently gone on to reflect that in that case she might also continue her 
treatment. This was what the dream referred to. One year is equal to 365 


1 [This dream is also discussed in Freud, Introductory Lectures (1916-17), Lecture 
VII.] 

2 [The remainder of the present section (F), with the exception of Example IV on 
p. 426, appeared in the original edition (1900).] 

3 [This point is discussed by Freud in Chapter XII (7) of his Psycho-pathology of 
Everyday Life ( 1 90 1 b) and in Section II of his paper on ‘The Uncanny’ ( 1 9 1 9h) ■] 

4 [The old Austrian currency in florins and kreuzers was not replaced until after 
the first publication of this book. 1 florin (= 100 kreuzers) was at that time ap- 
proximately equivalent to an English lr. 10^. or an American 40 cents. Accord- 
ingly, of the sums mentioned in this dream and the next, 3 fl. 65 would have 
been about 6s. or $1.25; 21 kr. about Ad. or 7Vi cents; 1 fl. 50 about 2s. 6d. or 
62/2 cents; and 150 fl. about £12 lOr. or $62.50.] 




424 


VI. The Dream-Work 


days. The three weeks which remained both of the school-year and of the 
treatment were equivalent to 21 days (though the hours of treatment 
would be less than this). The numbers, which in the dream-thoughts re- 
ferred to periods of time, were attached in the dream itself to sums of 
money — not but what there was a deeper meaning involved, for ‘time is 
money.’ 365 kreuzers only amount to 3 florins and 65 kreuzers; and the 
smallness of the sums that occurred in the dream was obviously the result 
of wish-fulfilment. The dreamer’s wish reduced the cost both of the treat- 
ment and of the year’s school-fees. 


ii 

The numbers which occurred in another dream involved more com- 
plicated circumstances. A lady who, though she was still young, had been 
married for a number of years, received news that an acquaintance of 
hers, Elise L., who was almost exactly her contemporary, had just become 
engaged. Thereupon she had the following dream. She was at the theatre 
with her husband. One side of the stalls was completely empty. Her husband 
told her thai Elise L. and her fiance had wanted to go too; but had only been 
able to get bad seats — three for 1 florin 50 kreuzers 1 — and of course they 
could not take those. She thought it would not really have done any harm if 
they had. 

What was the origin of the 1 florin 50 kreuzers? It came from what was 
in fact an indifferent event of the previous day. Her sister-in-law had been 
given a present of 150 florins by her husband and had been in a hurry to 
get rid of them by buying a piece of jewellery. It is to be noticed that 1 50 
florins is a htmdred times as much as 1 florin 50 kreuzers. Where did the 
three come from which was the number of the theatre tickets? The only 
connection here was that her newly-engaged friend was the same number 
of months — three — her junior. The solution of the dream was arrived at 
with the discovery of the meaning of the empty stalls. They were an un- 
modified allusion to a small incident which had given her husband a good 
excuse for teasing her. She had planned to go to one of the plays that had 
been announced for the coming week and had taken the trouble to buy 
tickets several days ahead, and had therefore had to pay a booking fee. 


1 [See previous footnote.] 




F. Calculations in Dreams 


425 


When they got to the theatre they found that one side of the house was al- 
most empty. There had been no need for her to he in such a hurry. 

Let me now put the dream-thoughts in place of the dream. ‘It was ab- 
surd to marry so early. There was no need for me to be in such a hurry. 1 see 
from Elise L.’s example that I should have got a husband in the end. In- 
deed, I should have got one a hundred times better’ (a treasure) ‘if I had 
only waited' (in antithesis to her sister-in-law’s hurry). ‘My money’ (or 
dowry) ‘could have bought three men just as good.’ 

It will be observed that the meaning and context of the numbers have 
been altered to a far greater extent in this dream than in the former one. 
The processes of modification and distortion have gone further here; and 
this is to be explained by the dream-thoughts in this case having to over- 
come a specially high degree of endopsychic resistance before they could 
obtain representation. Nor should we overlook the fact that there was an 
element of absurdity in the dream, namely the three seats being taken by 
two people. I will anticipate my discussion of absurdity in dreams [pp. 434 
ff.] by pointing out that this absurd detail in the content of the dream was 
intended to represent the most strongly emphasized of the dream-thoughts, 
viz., ‘it was absurd to marry so early.’ The absurdity which had to find a 
place in the dream was ingeniously supplied by the number 3, which was 
itself derived from a quite immaterial point of distinction between the two 
people under comparison — the 3 months’ difference between their ages. 
The reduction of the actual 150 florins to 1 florin 50 corresponded to the 
low value assigned by the dreamer to her husband (or treasure), in her sup- 
pressed thoughts. 1 


hi 

The next example exhibits the methods of calculation employed by 
dreams, which have brought them into so much disrepute. A man had a 
dream that he was settled in a chair at the B. ’s — a family with which he had 
been formerly acquainted — and said to them: ‘It was a great mistake your 


1 [This dream is more elaborately analysed at various points in Freud’s Introduc- 
tory Lectures (1916-17), particularly at the end of Lecture VII and in two places 
in Lecture XIV. It and the preceding dream are also recorded in Section VII of 
Freud’s work On Dreams (1901<?), Standard Ed., 5, 669.] 




426 


VI. The Dream-Work 


not letting me have Mali. ’ — ‘How old are you?’ he then went on to ask the 
girl. — 7 ivas born in 1882,’ she replied . — ‘Oh, so you’re 28, then.’ 

Since the dream dates from 1 898 this was evidently a miscalculation, 
and the dreamer’s inability to do sums would deserve to be compared 
with that of a general paralytic unless it could be explained in some other 
way. My patient was one of those people who, whenever they happen to 
catch sight of a woman, cannot let her alone in their thoughts. The pa- 
tient who for some months used regularly to come next after him in my 
consulting room, and whom he thus ran into, was a young lady; he used 
constantly to make enquiries about her and was most anxious to create a 
good impression with her. It was she whose age he estimated at 28 years. 
So much by way of explanation of the result of the ostensible calculation. 
1882, incidentally, was the year in which the dreamer had married. — I 
may add that he was unable to resist entering into conversation with the 
two other members of the female sex whom he came across in my 
house — the two maids (neither of them by any means youthful), one or 
other of whom used to open the door to him; he explained their lack of 
response as being due to their regarding him as an elderly gentleman of 
settled habits. 


IV 1 

Here is another dream dealing with figures, which is characterized by 
the clarity of the manner in which it was determined, or rather, over- 
determined. I owe both the dream and its interpretation to Dr. B. Dat- 
tner. ‘The landlord of my block of flats, who is a police-constable, dreamt 
that he was on street duty. (This was a wish-fulfilment.) An inspector came 
up to him, ivho had the number 22 followed by 62 or 26, on his collar. At 
any rate there were several twos on it. 

‘The mere fact that in reporting the dream the dreamer broke up the 
number 2262 showed that its components had separate meanings. He re- 
called that the day before there had been some talk at the police station 
about the men’s length of service. The occasion for it was an inspector 
who had retired on his pension at the age of 62. The dreamer had only 
served for 22 years, and it would be 2 years and 2 months before he 


1 [This example was added in 1911.] 




F. Calculations in Dreams 


427 


would be eligible for a 90 per cent pension. The dream represented in the 
first place the fulfilment of a long-cherished wish of the dreamer’s to 
reach the rank of inspector. The superior officer with “2262” on his collar 
was the dreamer himself. He was on street duty — another favourite wish 
of his — he had served his remaining 2 years and 2 months and now, like 
the 62-year-old inspector, he could retire on a full pension.’ 1 

When we take together these and some other examples which I shall 
give later [pp. 456 ffi], we may safely say that the dream-work does not in 
fact carry out any calculations at all, whether correctly or incorrectly; it 
merely throws into the form of a calculation numbers which are present in 
the dream-thoughts and can serve as allusions to matter that cannot be rep- 
resented in any other way. In this respect the dream-work is treating num- 
bers as a medium for the expression of its purpose in precisely the same way 
as it treats any other idea, including proper names and speeches that occur 
recognizably as verbal presentations. [See next paragraph but one.] 

For the dream-work cannot actually create speeches. [See above, pp. 206 
f. and 321.] However much speeches and conversations, whether reasonable 
or unreasonable in themselves, may figure in dreams, analysis invariably 
proves that all that the dream has done is to extract from the dream- 
thoughts fragments of speeches which have really been made or heard. It 
deals with these fragments in the most arbitrary fashion. Not only does it 
drag them out of their context and cut them in pieces, incorporating some 
portions and rejecting others, but it often puts them together in a new order, 
so that a speech which appears in the dream to be a connected whole turns 
out in analysis to be composed of three or four detached fragments. In pro- 
ducing this new version, a dream will often abandon the meaning that the 
words originally had in the dream-thoughts and give them a fresh one. 2 If 
we look closely into a speech that occurs in a dream, we shall find that it 
consists on the one hand of relatively clear and compact portions and on the 


1 [Footnote added 1914:] For analyses of other dreams containing numbers, see 
Jung [1911], Marcinowski [1912 b\ and others. These often imply very compli- 
cated operations with numbers, which have been carried out by the dreamer 
with astonishing accuracy. See also Jones (1912<r). 

2 [Footnote added 1909:] in this respect neuroses behave exactly like dreams. I 
know a patient one of whose symptoms is that, involuntarily and against her 
will, she hears — i.e. hallucinates — songs or fragments of songs, without being 
able to understand what part they play in her mental life. (Incidentally, she is 



428 


VI. The Dream-Work 


other hand of portions which serve as connecting matter and have probably 
been filled in at a later stage, just as, in reading, we fill in any letters or sylla- 
bles that may have been accidentally omitted. Thus speeches in dreams have 
a structure similar to that of breccia, in which largish blocks of various kinds 
of stone are cemented together by a binding medium. [Cf. p. 457.] 

Strictly speaking, this description applies only to such speeches in 
dreams as possess something of the sensory quality of speech, and which 
are described by the dreamer himself as being speeches. Other sorts of 
speeches, which are not, as it were, felt by him as having been heard or 


certainly not paranoiac.) Analysis has shown that, by allowing herself a certain 
amount of licence, she puts the text of these songs to false uses. For instance in 
the lines from [Agathe’s aria in Weber’s Freischiitz\ ‘Leise, leise, Fromme Weise!’ 
[literally, ‘Softly, softly, devout melody’] the last word was taken by her uncon- 
scious as though it was spelt ‘Waise’ [= ‘orphan,’ thus making the lines read 
‘Softly, softly, pious orphan,’] the orphan being herself. Again ‘O du selige, o du 
frohliche’ [‘Oh thou blessed and happy . . .’] is the opening of a Christmas carol; 
by not continuing the quotation to the word ‘Christmastide’ she turned it into 
a bridal song. — The same mechanism of distortion can also operate in the oc- 
currence of an idea unaccompaniedby hallucination. Why was it that one of my 
patients was pestered by the recollection of a poem that he had had to learn in 
his youth: ‘Ndchtlich am Busento lispeln . . .’ [‘By night on the Busento whisper- 
ing ...’]? Because his imagination went no further than the first part of this quo- 
tation; ‘Ndchtlich am Busen, ’ [‘By night on the bosom.’] 

We are familiar with the fact that this same technical trick is used by parodists. 
Included in a series of ‘Illustrations to the German Classics’ published in Fliegende 
Blatter [the well-known comic paper] was one which illustrated Schiller’s ‘Sieges- 
fest, ’with the following quotation attached to it: 

Und des frisch erkampften Weibes 
Freut sich der Atrid und strickt . . . 

[The conqu’ring son of Atreus sits 
At his fair captive’s side and knits. . . .] 

Here the quotation broke off. In the original the lines continue: 

. . . Um den Reiz des schonen Leibes 
Seine Anne hochbegliickt. 

[. . . His joyful and triumphant arms 
About her body’s lovely charms.] 




F. Calculations in Dreams 


429 


spoken (that is, which have no acoustic or motor accompaniments in the 
dream), are merely thoughts such as occur in our waking thought-activity 
and are often carried over unmodified into our dreams. Another copious 
source of undifferentiated speeches of this kind, though one which it is 
difficult to follow up, seems to be provided by material that has been read. 
But whatever stands out markedly in dreams as a speech can be traced 
back to real speeches which have been spoken or heard by the dreamer. 

Instances showing that speeches in dreams have this origin have already 
been given by me in the course of analysing dreams which I have quoted 
for quite other purposes. Thus, in the ‘innocent’ market dream reported 
on p. 206, the spoken words ‘that’s not obtainable any longer’ served to 
identify me with the butcher, while one portion of the other speech, ‘I 
don’t recognize that; I won’t take it,’ was actually responsible for making 
the dream an ‘innocent’ one. The dreamer, it will be remembered, having 
had some suggestion made to her on the previous day by her cook, had 
replied with the words: ‘I don’t recognize that; behave yourself properly!’ 
The innocent-sounding first part of this speech was taken into the dream 
by way of allusion to its second part, which fitted excellently into the phan- 
tasy underlying the dream, but would at the same time have betrayed it. 

Here is another example, which will serve instead of many, all of them 
leading to the same conclusion. 

The dreamer was in a big courtyard in which some dead bodies were being 
burnt. I’m off,’ he said, 7 can ’t bear the sight of it. ’ (This was not definitely a 
speech.) He then met two butcher’s boys. ‘Well, 'he asked, ‘did it taste nice?’ 
‘No, ’one ofithem ansivered, ‘not a bit nice’- — as though it had been human flesh. 

The innocent occasion of the dream was as follows. The dreamer and 
his wife had paid a visit after supper to their neighbours, who were excel- 
lent people but not precisely appetizing. The hospitable old lady was just 
having her supper and had tried to force him (there is a phrase with a sex- 
ual sense used jokingly among men to render this idea 1 ) to taste some of 
it. He had declined, saying he had no appetite left; ‘Get along!’ she had 
replied, ‘you can manage it,’ or words to that effect. He had therefore been 
obliged to taste it and had complimented her on it, saying: ‘That was very 
nice.’ When he was once more alone with his wife he had grumbled at his 
neighbour’s insistence and also at the quality of the food. The thought, ‘I 


1 [‘Notzuchtigen ,’ ‘ to force sexually,’ ‘to rape,’ is so used in place of ‘notigen, ”to force’ 
(in the ordinary sense).] 




430 


VI. The Dream-Work 


can’t bear the sight of it,’ which in the dream too failed to emerge as a 
speech in the strict sense, was an allusion to the physical charms of the lady 
from which the invitation had come, and it must be taken as meaning that 
he had no desire to look at them. 

More instruction can be derived from another dream, which I shall re- 
port in this connection on account of the very distinct speech which 
formed its centre-point, although I shall have to put off explaining it fully 
till I come to discuss affect in dreams [pp. 466 ff.]. I had a very clear dream. 
I had gone to Briicke’s laboratory at night, and, in response to a gentle knock 
on the door, I opened it to (the late) Professor Fleischl , 1 who came in with a 
number of strangers and, after exchanging a few words, sat doivn at his table. 
This was followed by a second dream. My friend FI. [Fliess] had come to Vi- 
enna unobtrusively in July. I met him in the street in conversation with my (de- 
ceased) friend P., and went ivith them to some place ivhere they sat opposite 
each other as though they were at a small table. I sat in front at its narrow end. 
FI. spoke about his sister and said that in three quarters of an hour she was 
dead, and added some such ivords as ‘ that was the threshold. ’As P. failed to un- 
derstand him, 2 FI. turned to me and asked me how much I had told P. about 
his affairs. Whereupon, overcome by strange emotions, I tried to explain to FI. 
that P. ( could not understand anything at all, of course, because he) was not 
alive. But what I actually said — and I myself noticed the mistake — was, ‘Non 
vixit.’ I then gave P. a piercing look. Under my gaze he turned pale; his form 
grew indistinct and his eyes a sickly blue — and finally he melted away. I was 
highly delighted at this and I now realized that Ernst Fleischl, too, had been no 
more than an apparition, a ‘revenant’ [‘ghost’ — literally, ‘one who returns’]; 
and it seetned to me quite possible that people of that kind only existed as long 
as one liked and could be got rid of if someone else wished it. 

This fine specimen includes many of the characteristics of dreams — the 
fact that I exercised my critical faculties during the dream and myself no- 
ticed my mistake when I said Non vixit’ instead of Non vivit’ [that is, ‘he 
did not live’ instead of ‘he is not alive’], my unconcerned dealings with 
people who were dead and were recognized as being dead in the dream it- 
self, the absurdity of my final inference and the great satisfaction it gave 
me. This dream exhibits so many of these puzzling features, indeed, that I 
would give a great deal to be able to present the complete solution of its 


1 [See footnote on p. 487 for an explanation of the persons concerned.] 

1 [This detail is analysed below on p. 517.] 




F. Calculations in Dreams 


431 


conundrums. But in point of fact I am incapable of doing so — of doing, 
that is to say, what I did in the dream, of sacrihcing to my ambition people 
whom I greatly value. Any concealment, however, would destroy what I 
know very well to be the dream’s meaning; and I shall therefore content 
myself, both here and in a later context [pp. 485 ff.], with selecting only a 
few of its elements for interpretation. 

The central feature of the dream was a scene in which I annihilated P. 
with a look. His eyes changed to a strange and uncanny blue and he 
melted away. This scene was unmistakably copied from one which I had 
actually experienced. At the time I have in mind I had been a demonstra- 
tor at the Physiological Institute and was due to start work early in the 
morning. It came to Briicke’s ears that I sometimes reached the students’ 
laboratory late. One morning he turned up punctually at the hour of 
opening and awaited my arrival. His words were brief and to the point. 
But it was not they that mattered. What overwhelmed me were the terri- 
ble blue eyes with which he looked at me and by which I was reduced to 
nothing — just as P. was in the dream, where, to my relief, the roles were 
reversed. No one who can remember the great man’s eyes, which retained 
their striking beauty even in his old age, and who has ever seen him in 
anger, will find it difficult to picture the young sinner’s emotions. 

It was a long time, however, before 1 succeeded in tracing the origin of 
the ‘Non vixit’ with which I passed judgement in the dream. But at last it 
occurred to me that these two words possessed their high degree of clarity 
in the dream, not as words heard or spoken, but as words seen. I then knew 
at once where they came from. On the pedestal of the Kaiser Josef Memo- 
rial in the Hofburg [Imperial Palace] in Vienna the following impressive 
words are inscribed: 


Saluti patriae vixit 
non diu sed totus. 1 


1 [‘For the well-being of his country he lived not long but wholly .’] — Footnote 
added 1925:] The actual wording of the inscription is: 

Saluti publicae vixit 
non diu sed totus. 

The reason for my mistake in putting ‘patriae’ for ‘publicae ’ has probably been 
rightly guessed by Wittels [1924, 86; Engl, trans. (1924), 100 £] 




432 


VI. The Dream-Work 


I extracted from this inscription just enough to fit in with a hostile train 
of ideas among the dream-thoughts, just enough to imply that ‘this fellow 
has no say in the matter — he isn’t even alive.’ And this reminded me that 
I had the dream only a few days after the unveiling of the memorial to 
Fleischl in the cloisters of the University. 1 At that time 1 had seen the 
Briicke memorial once again and must have reflected (unconsciously) 
with regret on the fact that the premature death of my brilliant friend P., 
whose whole life had been devoted to science, had robbed him of a well- 
merited claim to a memorial in these same precincts. Accordingly, I gave 
him this memorial in my dream; and, incidentally, as I remembered, his 
first name was Josef. 2 

By the rules of dream-interpretation I was even now not entitled to pass 
from the Non vixit derived from my recollection of the Kaiser Josef Me- 
morial to the Non vixit required by the sense of the dream-thoughts. There 
must have been some other element in the dream-thoughts which would 
help to make the transition possible. It then struck me as noticeable that 
in the scene in the dream there was a convergence of a hostile and an af- 
fectionate current of feeling towards my friend P., the former being on the 
surface and the latter concealed, but both of them being represented in the 
single phrase Non vixit. As he had deserved well of science I built him a 
memorial; but as he was guilty of an evil wish 3 (which was expressed at the 
end of the dream) I annihilated him. I noticed that this last sentence had 
a quite special cadence, and I must have had some model in my mind. 
Where was an antithesis of this sort to be found, a juxtaposition like this 
of two opposite reactions towards a single person, both of them claiming 
to be completely justified and yet not incompatible? Only in one passage 
in literature — but a passage which makes a profound impression on the 
reader: in Brutus’s speech of self-justification in Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar 
[iii, 2], ‘As Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice 
at it; as he was valiant, I honour him; but, as he was ambitious, I slew 
him.’ Were not the formal structure of these sentences and their antitheti- 


1 [This ceremony took place on October 16, 1898.] 

2 1 may add as an example of overdetermination that my excuse for arriving too 
late at the laboratory lay in the fact that after working far into the night I had in 
the morning to cover the long distance between the Kaiser Josef Strasse and the 
Wahringer Strasse. 

3 [This detail is further explained below, on p. 490.] 



F. Calculations in Dreams 


433 


cal meaning precisely the same as in the dream-thought I had uncovered? 
Thus I had been playing the part of Brutus in the dream. If only I could 
find one other piece of evidence in the content of the dream to confirm 
this surprising collateral connecting link! A possible one occurred to me. 
My friend FI. came to Vienna in July. 'There was no basis in reality for this 
detail of the dream. So far as I knew, my friend FI. had never been in Vi- 
enna in July. But the month of July was named after Julius Caesar and 
might therefore very well represent the allusion I wanted to the interme- 
diate thought of my playing the part of Brutus. 1 

Strange to say, 1 really did once play the part of Brutus. I once acted 
in the scene between Brutus and Caesar from Schiller 2 before an audience 
of children. I was fourteen years old at the time and was acting with a 
nephew who was a year my senior. He had come to us on a visit from En- 
gland; and he, too, was a revenant, for it was the playmate of my earliest 
years who had returned in him. Until the end of my third year we had 
been inseparable. We had loved each other and fought with each other; 
and this childhood relationship, as I have already hinted above [pp. 219 
and 251], had a determining influence on all my subsequent relations 
with contemporaries. Since that time my nephew John has had many re- 
incarnations which revived now one side and now another of his person- 
ality, unalterably fixed as it was in my unconscious memory. There must 
have been times when he treated me very badly and I must have shown 
courage in the face of my tyrant; for in my later years I have often been 
told of a short speech made by me in my own defence when my father, 
who was at the same time John’s grandfather, had said to me accusingly: 
Why are you hitting John?’ My reply — I was not yet two years old at the 
time — was ‘I hit him ‘cos he hit me.’ It must have been this scene from 
my childhood which diverted Non vivit’ into Non vixit, ’ for in the lan- 
guage of later childhood the word for to hit is 'wichsen ’ [pronounced like 
the English ‘vixen’]. The dream- work is not ashamed to make use of links 
such as this one. There was little basis in reality for my hostility to my 
friend P., who was very greatly my superior and for that reason was well 
fitted to appear as a new edition of my early playmate. This hostility must 


1 There was the further connection between ‘Caesar’ and ‘Kaiser.’ 

2 [This is in fact a lyric in dialogue form recited by Karl Moor in Act IV, Scene 5, 
of the earlier version of Schiller’s play Die Rduberi\ 




434 


VI. The Dream-Work 


therefore certainly have gone back to my complicated childhood relations 
to John. [See further pp. 488.] 1 

As I have said, I shall return to this dream later. 


(G) 

ABSURD DREAMS— INTELLECTUAL 
ACTIVITY IN DREAMS 2 

In the course of our dream-interpretations we have so often come 
across the element of absurdity that we cannot postpone any longer the 
moment of investigating its source and significance, if it has any. For it 
will be remembered that the absurdity of dreams has provided those who 
deny the value of dreams with one of their principal arguments in favour 
of regarding them as the meaningless product of a reduced and fragmen- 
tary mental activity [see pp. 84 ff.]. 

I shall begin by giving a few examples in which the absurdity is only 
an apparent one and disappears as soon as the meaning of the dream is 
more closely examined. Here are two or three dreams which deal (by 
chance, as it may seem at first sight) with the dreamer’s dead father. 


i 

This is the dream of a patient who had lost his father six years earlier. 
His father had met with a grave calamity. He had been travelling by the night 
train, which had been derailed. The carriage seats were forced together and 


1 [Freud discusses his relations with his nephew John in a letter to Fliess of Octo- 
ber 3, 1897. (Freud, 1950a, Letter 70.) A further, somewhat disguised account 
of an early episode, in which John and his younger sister Pauline (referred to be- 
low on p. 49 1 ) figured, is no doubt to be seen in the latter part of Freud’s paper 
on ‘Screen Memories’ (1899a). — The subject of speeches in dreams is also men- 
tioned on pp. 207, 321, 329 and 471.] 

1 [Henceforward, until the end of the book, it is to be assumed once more that the 
whole of the matter appeared in the first (1900) edition, except for passages to 
which a later date is specifically assigned.] 




G. Absurd Dreams 


435 


his head was compressed from side to side. The dreamer then saw him lying 
in bed with a wound over his left eyebrow which ran in a vertical direction. 
He was surprised at his father’s having met with a calamity ( since he was al- 
ready dead, as he added in telling me the dream). Hoiv clear his eyes were! 

According to the ruling theory of dreams we should have to explain the 
content of this dream as follows. To begin with, we should suppose, while 
the dreamer was imagining the accident, he must have forgotten that his 
father had been in his grave for several years; but, as the dream proceeded, 
the recollection must have emerged, and led to his astonishment at his 
own dream while he was still asleep. Analysis teaches us, however, that it is 
eminently useless to look for explanations of this kind. The dreamer had 
commissioned a bust of his father from a sculptor and had seen it for the 
first time two days before the dream. It was this that he had thought of as 
a calamity. The sculptor had never seen his father and had worked from 
photographs. On the day immediately before the dream the dreamer, in 
his filial piety, had sent an old family servant to the studio to see whether 
he would form the same opinion of the marble head, namely, that it was 
too narrow from side to side at the temples. He now proceeded to recall 
from his memory the material which had gone to the construction of the 
dream. Whenever his father was tormented by business worries or family 
difficulties, he had been in the habit of pressing his hands to the sides of 
his forehead, as though he felt that his head was too wide and wanted to 
compress it. — When the patient was four years old he had been present 
when a pistol, which had been accidentally loaded, had been discharged 
and had blackened his father’s eyes. ( 'How clear his eyes ivere!’) — At the 
spot on his forehead at which the dream located his father’s injury, a deep 
furrow showed during his lifetime whenever he was thoughtful or sad. The 
fact that this furrow was replaced in the dream by a wound led back to the 
second exciting cause of the dream. The dreamer had taken a photograph 
of his little daughter. The plate had slipped through his fingers, and when 
he picked it up showed a crack which ran perpendicularly down the little 
girl’s forehead as far as her eyebrow. He could not help feeling supersti- 
tious about this, since a few days before his mother’s death he had broken 
a photographic plate with her portrait on it. 

The absurdity of this dream was thus no more than the result of a piece 
of carelessness in verbal expression which failed to distinguish the bust and 
the photograph from the actual person. We might any of us say [looking 
at a picture]: ‘There’s something wrong with Father, don’t you think?’ The 
appearance of absurdity in the dream could easily have been avoided; and 



436 


VI. The Dream-Work 


if we were to judge from this single example, we should be inclined to 
think that the apparent absurdity had been permitted or even designed. 


ii 

Here is another, almost exactly similar, example from a dream of my 
own. (I lost my father in 1896.) After his death my father played a political 
part among the Magyars and brought them together politically. Here I saw a 
small and indistinct picture: a crowd of men as though they ivere in the Re- 
ichstag; someone standing on one or two chairs, with other people round him. 
I remembered how like Garibaldi he had looked on his death-bed, and felt 
glad that that promise had cotne true. 

What could be more absurd than this? It was dreamt at a time at 
which the Hungarians had been driven by parliamentary obstruction into 
a state of lawlessness and were plunged into the crisis from which they 
were rescued by Koloman Szell. 1 The trivial detail of the scene in the 
dream appearing in pictures of such a small size was not without rele- 
vance to its interpretation. Our dream-thoughts are usually represented 
in visual pictures which appear to be more or less life-size. The picture 
which I saw in my dream, however, was a reproduction of a woodcut in- 
serted in an illustrated history of Austria, which showed Maria Theresa at 
the Reichstag [Diet] of Pressburg in the famous episode of Moriamur pro 
rege nostro l 2 Like Maria Theresa in the picture, so my father stood in the 
dream surrounded by the crowd. But he was standing on one or two chairs 
[‘chair’ = ‘ Sttihl ']. He had brought them together, and was thus a presiding 
judge [‘ Stuhlrichter ; ’literally ‘chair-judge’]. (A connecting link was pro- 
vided by the common [German] phrase ‘we shall need no judge.’) — 


1 [An acute political crisis in Hungary in 1898-9 had been solved by the forma- 
tion of a coalition government under Szell.] 

2 [‘We will die for our king!’ The response of the Hungarian nobles to Maria 
Theresa’s plea for support, after her accession in 1740, in the War of the Aus- 
trian Succession.] — I cannot remember where I read an account of a dream 
which was filled with unusually small figures, and the source of which turned 
out to be one of Jacques Callot’s etchings seen by the dreamer during the day. 
These etchings do in fact contain a large number of very small figures. One series 
of them depicts the horrors of the Thirty Years’ War. 




G. Absurd Dreams 


437 


Those of us who were standing round had in fact remarked how like 
Garibaldi my father looked on his death-bed. He had had a post mortem 
rise of temperature, his cheeks had been flushed more and more deeply 
red. ... As I recalled this, my thoughts involuntarily ran on: 

Und hinter ihm in wesenlosem Scheine 

Lag, was uns alle bandigt, das Gemeine . 1 

These elevated thoughts prepared the way [in the analysis] for the ap- 
pearance of something that was common [ ‘gemein ’] in another sense. My 
father’s post mortem rise of temperature corresponded to the words ‘after 
his death’ in the dream. His most severe suffering had been caused by a 
complete paralysis ( obstruction ) of the intestines during his last weeks. 
Disrespectful thoughts of all kinds followed from this. One of my con- 
temporaries who lost his father while he was still at his secondary 
school — on that occasion I myself had been deeply moved and had of- 
fered to be his friend — once told me scornfully of how one of his female 
relatives had had a painful experience. Her father had fallen dead in the 
street and had been brought home; when his body was undressed it was 
found that at the moment of death, or post mortem, he had passed a stool 
[' Stuhl ’]. His daughter had been so unhappy about this that she could not 
prevent this ugly detail from disturbing her memory of her father. Here 
we have reached the wish that was embodied in this dream. ‘To stand be- 
fore one’s children’s eyes, after one’s death, great and unsullied’ — who 
would not desire this? What has become of the absurdity of the dream? 
Its apparent absurdity is due only to the fact that it gave a literal picture 
of a figure of speech which is itself perfectly legitimate and in which we 
habitually overlook any absurdity involved in the contradiction between 
its parts. In this instance, once again, it is impossible to escape an impres- 
sion that the apparent absurdity is intentional and has been deliberately 
produced . 2 


1 [These lines are from the Epilogue to Schiller’s ‘Lied von der Glocke’ written by 
Goethe a few months after his friend’s death. He speaks of Schiller’s spirit moving 
forward into the eternity of truth, goodness and beauty, while ‘behind him, a shad- 
owy illusion, lay what holds us all in bondage — the things that are common.’] 

2 [This dream is further discussed on pp. 455.] 




438 


VI. The Dream-Work 


The frequency with which dead people appear in dreams 1 and act and 
associate with us as though they were alive has caused unnecessary surprise 
and has produced some remarkable explanations which throw our lack of 
understanding of dreams into strong relief. Yet the explanation of these 
dreams is a very obvious one. It often happens that we find ourselves think- 
ing: ‘If my father were alive, what would he say to this?’ Dreams are unable 
to express an ‘if’ of this kind except by representing the person concerned 
as present in some particular situation. Thus, for instance, a young man 
who had been left a large legacy by his grandfather, dreamt, at a time when 
he was feeling self-reproaches for having spent a considerable sum of money, 
that his grandfather was alive again and calling him to account. And when, 
from our better knowledge, we protest that after all the person in question 
is dead, what we look upon as a criticism of the dream is in reality either a 
consoling thought that the dead person has not lived to witness the event, 
or a feeling of satisfaction that he can no longer interfere in it. 

There is another kind of absurdity, which occurs in dreams of dead rel- 
atives but which does not express ridicule and derision . 2 It indicates an 
extreme degree of repudiation, and so makes it possible to represent a re- 
pressed thought which the dreamer would prefer to regard as utterly un- 
thinkable. It seems impossible to elucidate dreams of this kind unless one 
bears in mind the fact that dreams do not differentiate between what is 
wished and what is real. For instance, a man who had nursed his father 
during his last illness and had been deeply grieved by his death, had the 
following senseless dream some time afterwards. His father was alive once 
more and was talking to him in his usual ivay, but (the remarkable thing 
was that) he had really died, only he did not knoiv it. This dream only be- 
comes intelligible if, after the words ‘but he had really died’ we insert ‘in 
consequence of the dreamer’s wish,’ and if we explain that what ‘he did 


1 [This paragraph was added as a footnote in 1909 and included in the text in 
1930.] 

2 [This paragraph was added as a footnote in 1911 and included in the text in 
1930. The first sentence of the paragraph implies that Freud has already ex- 
plained absurdity in dreams as being due to the presence of ‘ridicule and derision’ 
in the dream-thoughts. Actually he has not yet done so, and this conclusion is 
only explicitly stated in the paragraph below (on p. 452) in which he sums up his 
theory of absurd dreams. It seems possible that the present paragraph, in its orig- 
inal footnote form, may by some oversight have been introduced here instead of 
at the later point.] 




G. Absurd Dreams 


439 


not know’ was that the dreamer had had this wish. While he was nursing 
his father he had repeatedly wished his father were dead; that is to say, he 
had had what was actually a merciful thought that death might put an 
end to his sufferings. During his mourning, after his father’s death, even 
this sympathetic wish became a subject of unconscious self-reproach, as 
though by means of it he had really helped to shorten the sick man’s life. 
A stirring up of the dreamer’s earliest infantile impulses against his father 
made it possible for this self-reproach to find expression as a dream; but 
the fact that the instigator of the dream and the daytime thoughts were 
such worlds apart was precisely what necessitated the dream’s absurdity . 1 

It is true that dreams of dead people whom the dreamer has loved raise 
difficult problems in dream-interpretation and that these cannot always be 
satisfactorily solved. The reason for this is to be found in the particularly 
strongly marked emotional ambivalence which dominates the dreamer’s 
relation to the dead person. It very commonly happens that in dreams of 
this kind the dead person is treated to begin with as though he were alive, 
that he then suddenly turns out to be dead and that in a subsequent part 
of the dream he is alive once more. This has a confusing effect. It eventu- 
ally occurred to me that this alternation between death and life is intended 
to represent indifference on the part of the dreamer. (‘It’s all the same to 
me whether he’s alive or dead.’) This indifference is, of course, not real but 
merely desired; it is intended to help the dreamer to repudiate his very in- 
tense and often contradictory emotional attitudes and it thus becomes a 
dream-representation of his ambivalence . — In other dreams in which the 
dreamer associates with dead people, the following rule often helps to give 
us our bearings. If there is no mention in the dream of the fact that the 
dead man is dead, the dreamer is equating himself with him: he is dream- 
ing of his own death. If, in the course of the dream, the dreamer suddenly 
says to himself in astonishment, ‘why, he died ever so long ago,’ he is re- 
pudiating this equation and is denying that the dream signifies his own 
death. 2 — But I willingly confess to a feeling that dream-interpretation is 
far from having revealed all the secrets of dreams of this character. 


1 [Footnote 1911:] Cf. my paper on the two principles of mental functioning 
(1911 b) [attheendof which this same dream is discussed. — A very similar dream 
is analysed as No. 3 in the twelfth of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916-17). — 
The next paragraph was added as a footnote in 1919 and included in the text in 
1930.] 

2 [This point was first made in Freud (1913 h).] 




440 


VI. The Dream-Work 


hi 

In the example which I shall next bring forward I have been able to 
catch the dream-work in the very act of intentionally fabricating an ab- 
surdity for which there was absolutely no occasion in the material. It is 
taken from the dream which arose from my meeting with Count Thun as 
I was starting for my holidays. [See pp. 229 ff.] / was driving in a cab and 
ordered the driver to drive me to a station. ‘Of coarse I can ’t drive with you 
along the raihvay line itself ’ I said, after he had raised some objection, as 
though I had overtired him. It was as if I had already driven with him for some 
of the distance one normally travels by train. The analysis produced the fol- 
lowing explanations of this confused and senseless story. The day before, I 
had hired a cab to take me to an out-of-the-way street in Dornbach. 1 The 
driver, however, had not known where the street was and, as these excellent 
people are apt to do, had driven on and on until at last I had noticed what 
was happening and had told him the right way, adding a few sarcastic com- 
ments. A train of thought, to which I was later in the analysis to return, 
led from this cab-driver to aristocrats. For the moment it was merely the 
passing notion that what strikes us bourgeois plebs about the aristocracy is 
the preference they have for taking the driver’s seat. Count Thun, indeed, 
was the driver of the State Coach of Austria. The next sentence in the 
dream, however, referred to my brother, whom I was thus identifying with 
the cab-driver. That year I had called off a trip I was going to make with 
him to Italy. (‘I can’t drive with you along the railway line itself’) And this 
cancellation had been a kind of punishment for the complaints he used to 
make that I was in the habit of over-tiring him on such trips (this appeared 
in the dream unaltered) by insisting upon moving too rapidly from place 
to place and seeing too many beautiful things in a single day. On the 
evening of the dream my brother had accompanied me to the station; but 
he had jumped out shortly before we got there, at the suburban railway sta- 
tion adjoining the main line terminus, in order to travel to Purkersdorf 2 
by the suburban line. 1 had remarked to him that he might have stayed 
with me a little longer by travelling to Purkersdorf by the main line instead 
of the suburban one. This led to the passage in the dream in which I drove 
in the cab for some of the distance one normally travels by train. This was an 

1 [On the outskirts of Vienna.] 

1 [Seven or eight miles outside Vienna.] 



G. Absurd Dreams 


441 


inversion of what had happened in reality — a kind of ‘tu quoque’ argument 
What I had said to my brother was: ‘you can travel on the main line in my 
company for the distance you would travel by the suburban line.’ I 
brought about the whole confusion in the dream by putting ‘cab’ instead 
of ‘suburban line’ (which, incidentally, was of great help in bringing to- 
gether the figures of the cab-driver and my brother). In this way I suc- 
ceeded in producing something senseless in the dream, which it seems 
scarcely possible to disentangle and which was almost a direct contradic- 
tion of an earlier remark of mine in the dream (‘/ can ’t drive with you along 
the railway line itself’). Since, however, there was no necessity whatever for 
me to confuse the suburban railway and a cab, I must have arranged the 
whole of this enigmatic business in the dream on purpose. 

But for what purpose? We are now to discover the significance of ab- 
surdity in dreams and the motives which lead to its being admitted or even 
created. The solution of the mystery in the present dream was as follows. 
It was necessary for me that there should be something absurd and unin- 
telligible in this dream in connection with the word fahren 1 because the 
dream- thoughts included a particular judgement which called for repre- 
sentation. One evening, while I was at the house of the hospitable and 
witty lady who appeared as the ‘housekeeper’ in one of the other scenes in 
the same dream, I had heard two riddles which I had been unable to solve. 
Since they were familiar to the rest of the company, I cut a rather ludicrous 
figure in my vain attempts to find the answers. They depended upon puns 
on the words ‘Nachkommen’ and ‘Vorfahren’ and, I believe, ran as follows: 

Der Herr befiehlt’s, 

Der Kutscher tut’s. 

Ein jeder hat’s, 

Im Grabe ruht’s. 

[With the master’s request 
The driver complies: 

By all men possessed 
In the graveyard it lies.] 


1 [The German word ‘fahren,’ which has already been used repeatedly in the dream 
and the analysis, is used for the English ‘drive’ (in a cab) and ‘travel’ (in a train) 
and has had to be translated by both of those words in different contexts. See 
also p. 231 n.\ 




442 


VI. The Dream-Work 


(Answer: ‘Vorfahrer’ [‘Drive up’ and ‘Ancestry’; more literally ‘go in front’ 
and ‘predecessors’].) 

It was particularly confusing that the first half of the second riddle was 
identical with that of the first: 

Der Herr befiehlt’s, 

Der Kutscher tut’s. 

Nicht jeder hat’s, 

In der Wiege ruht’s. 

[With the master’s request 
The driver complies: 

Not by all men possessed 
In the cradle it lies.] 

(Answer: Nachkommen’ [‘Follow after’ and ‘Progeny’; more literally ‘come 
after’ and ‘successors’].) 

When I saw Count Thun drive up so impressively and when I there- 
upon fell into the mood of Figaro, with his remarks on the goodness of 
great gentlemen in having taken the trouble to be born (to become prog- 
eny), these two riddles were adopted by the dream-work as intermediate 
thoughts. Since aristocrats could easily be confused with drivers and since 
there was a time in our part of the world when a driver was spoken of as 
‘Schwager’ [‘coachman’ and ‘brother-in-law’], the work of condensation 
was able to introduce my brother into the same picture. The dream- 
thought, however, which was operating behind all this ran as follows: ‘It 
is absurd to be proud of one’s ancestry; it is better to be an ancestor one- 
self.’ This judgement, that something ‘is absurd,’ was what produced the 
absurdity in the dream. And this also clears up the remaining enigma in 
this obscure region of the dream, namely why it was that I thought I had 
already driven with the driver before [ vorhergefahren (‘driven before’) — 
vorgefahren (‘driven up’) — ‘Vorfahren’ (‘ancestry’)]. 

A dream is made absurd, then, if a judgement that something ‘is absurd’ 
is among the elements included in the dream-thoughts — that is to say, if 
any one of the dreamer’s unconscious trains of thought has criticism or rid- 
icule as its motive. Absurdity is accordingly one of the methods by which 
the dream-work represents a contradiction — alongside such other methods 
as the reversal in the dream-content of some material relation in the dream- 



G. Absurd Dreams 


443 


thoughts [pp. 341 £], or the exploitation of the sensation of motor inhibi- 
tion [pp. 351 £]. Absurdity in a dream, however, is not to be translated by 
a simple ‘no’; it is intended to reproduce the mood of the dream-thoughts, 
which combines derision or laughter with the contradiction. It is only with 
such an aim in view that the dream-work produces anything ridiculous. 
Here once again it is giving a manifest form to a portion of the latent content . 1 

Actually we have already come across a convincing example of an ab- 
surd dream with this kind of meaning; the dream — I interpreted it with- 
out any analysis — of the performance of a Wagner opera which lasted till 
a quarter to eight in the morning and in which the orchestra was con- 
ducted from a tower, and so on (see pp. 356 f.). It evidently meant to say: 
‘This is a topsy-turvy world and a crazy society; the person who deserves 
something doesn’t get it, and the person who doesn’t care about some- 
thing does get it’ — and there the dreamer was comparing her fate with her 
cousin’s. — Nor is it by any means a matter of chance that our first exam- 
ples of absurdity in dreams related to a dead father. In such cases, the con- 
ditions for creating absurd dreams are found together in characteristic 
fashion. The authority wielded by a father provokes criticism from his 
children at an early age, and the severity of the demands he makes upon 
them leads them, for their own relief, to keep their eyes open to any 
weakness of their father’s; but the filial piety called up in our minds by 
the figure of a father, particularly after his death, tightens the censorship 
which prohibits any such criticism from being consciously expressed. 


1 The dream-work is thus parodying the thought that has been presented to it as 
something ridiculous, by the method of creating something ridiculous in connec- 
tion with that thought. Heine adopted the same line when he wanted to ridicule 
some wretched verses written by the King of Bavaria. He did so in still more 
wretched ones: 


Herr Ludwig ist ein grosser Poet, 

Und singt er, so stiirzt Apollo 

Vor ihm auf die Kniee und bittet und fleht, 

‘Halt ein! ich werde sonst toll, o!’ 

[Sir Ludwig is a magnificent bard 

And, as soon as he utters, Apollo 

Goes down on his knees and begs him: ‘Hold hard! 

Or I’ll shortly become a clod-poll oh!’ 

Lobgesdnge auf Konig Ludwig, I.] 




444 


VI. The Dream-Work 


iv 

Here is another absurd dream about a dead father. I received a commu- 
nication from the town council of my birthplace concerning the fees due for 
someone’s maintenance in the hospital in the year 1851, ivhich had been ne- 
cessitated by an attack he had had in my house. I was amused by this since, 
in the first place, I was not yet alive in 1851 and, in the second place, my fa- 
ther, to whom it might have related, was already dead. I ivent to him in the 
next room, where he was lying on his bed, and told him about it. To my sur- 
prise, he recollected that in 1851 he had once got drunk and had had to be 
locked up or detained. It was at a time at which he had been working for the 

firm ofT . ‘So you used to drink as well?’ I asked; ‘did you get married 

soon after that?’ I calculated that, of course, I was born in 1856, which 
seemed to be the year ivhich immediately followed the year in question. 

We should conclude from the preceding discussion that the insistence 
with which this dream exhibited its absurdities could only be taken as indi- 
cating the presence in the dream-thoughts of a particularly embittered and 
passionate polemic. We shall therefore be all the more astonished to observe 
that in this dream the polemic was carried on in the open and that my father 
was the explicit object of the ridicule. Openness of this kind seems to con- 
tradict our assumptions as regards the working of the censorship in connec- 
tion with the dream-work. The position will become clearer, however, when 
it is realized that in this instance my father was merely put forward as a 
show-figure, and that the dispute was really being carried on with someone 
else, who only appeared in the dream in a single allusion. Whereas normally 
a dream deals with rebellion against someone else, behind whom the 
dreamer’s father is concealed, the opposite was true here. My father was 
made into a man of straw, in order to screen someone else; and the dream 
was allowed to handle in this undisguised way a figure who was as a rule 
treated as sacred, because at the same time I knew with certainty that it was 
not he who was really meant. That this was so was shown by the exciting 
cause of the dream. For it occurred after I had heard that a senior colleague 
of mine, whose judgement was regarded as beyond criticism, had given voice 
to disapproval and surprise at the fact that the psycho-analytic treatment of 
one of my patients had already entered its fifth year} The first sentences of 


1 [This was the patient frequently referred to in Freud’s letters to Fliess (Freud, 
1950a) as ‘E.’ The present dream is referred to in Letter 126 (December 21, 1899) 




G. Absurd Dreams 


445 


the dream alluded under a transparent disguise to the fact that for some time 
this colleague had taken over the duties which my father could no longer 
fulfil (j fees due,’ ‘ maintenance in the hospital’), and that, when our relations 
began to be less friendly, I became involved in the same kind of emotional 
conflict which, when a misunderstanding arises between a father and son, is 
inevitably produced owing to the position occupied by the father and the 
assistance formerly given by him. The dream-thoughts protested bitterly 
against the reproach that I was not getting on faster — a reproach which, ap- 
plying first to my treatment of the patient, extended later to other things. 
Did he know anyone, I thought, who could get on more quickly? Was he 
not aware that, apart from my methods of treatment, conditions of that 
kind are altogether incurable and last a lifetime? What were four or five years 
in comparison with a whole life-time, especially considering that the pa- 
tient’s existence had been so very much eased during the treatment? 

A great part of the impression of absurdity in this dream was brought 
about by running together sentences from different parts of the dream- 
thoughts without any transition. Thus the sentence ‘/ went to him in the 
next room,’ etc., dropped the subject with which the preceding sentences 
had been dealing and correctly reproduced the circumstances in which I 
informed my father of my having become engaged to be married without 
consulting him. This sentence was therefore reminding me of the ad- 
mirable unselfishness displayed by the old man on that occasion, and 
contrasting it with the behaviour of someone else — of yet another person. 
It is to be observed that the dream was allowed to ridicule my father be- 
cause in the dream-thoughts he was held up in unqualified admiration as 
a model to other people. It lies in the very nature of every censorship that 
of forbidden things it allows those which are untrue to be said rather than 
those which are true. The next sentence, to the effect that he recollected 
' having once got drunk and been locked up for it’ was no longer concerned 
with anything that related to my father in reality. Here the figure for 
whom he stood was no less a person than the great Meynert , 1 in whose 
footsteps I had trodden with such deep veneration and whose behaviour 
towards me, after a short period of favour, had turned to undisguised hos- 
tility. The dream reminded me that he himself had told me that at one 


and the very satisfactory termination of the treatment is announced in Letter 133 
(April 16, 1900).] 

1 [Theodor Meynert (1833-1892) had been Professor of Psychiatry at the Vienna 
University.] 




446 


VI. The Dream-Work 


time in his youth he had indulged in the habit of making himself intoxi- 
cated with chloroform and that on account of it he had had to go into a 
home. It also reminded me of another incident with him shortly before 
his death. I had carried on an embittered controversy with him in writ- 
ing, on the subject of male hysteria, the existence of which he denied. 1 
When I visited him during his fatal illness and asked after his condition, 
he spoke at some length about his state and ended with these words: ‘You 
know, I was always one of the clearest cases of male hysteria.’ He was thus 
admitting, to my satisfaction and astonishment, what he had for so long 
obstinately contested. But the reason why I was able in this scene of the 
dream to use my father as a screen for Meynert did not lie in any analogy 
that I had discovered between the two figures. The scene was a concise 
but entirely adequate representation of a conditional sentence in the 
dream-thoughts, which ran in full: ‘If only I had been the second gener- 
ation, the son of a professor or Hofrat, I should certainly have got on 
faster. ’ In the dream I made my father into a Hofrat and professor. — The 
most blatant and disturbing absurdity in the dream resides in its treat- 
ment of the date 1851, which seemed to me not to differ from 1856, just 
as though a difference of five years was of no significance whatever. But this 
last was precisely what the dream-thoughts sought to express. Four or five 
years was the length of time during which I enjoyed the support of the 
colleague whom I mentioned earlier in this analysis; but it was also the 
length of time during which I made my fiancee wait for our marriage; and 
it was also, by a chance coincidence which was eagerly exploited by the 
dream-thoughts, the length of time during which I made my patient of 
longest standing wait for a complete recovery. ‘ What are five years?’ asked 
the dream-thoughts; ‘that’s no time at all, so far as Fm concerned; it doesn ’t 
count. I have time enough in front of me. And just as I succeeded in the 
end in that, though you would not believe it, so I shall achieve this, too.’ 
Apart from this, however, the number 51 by itself, without the number 
of the century, was determined in another, and indeed, in an opposite 
sense; and this, too, is why it appeared in the dream several times. 5 1 is 
the age which seems to be a particularly dangerous one to men; I have 
known colleagues who have died suddenly at that age, and amongst them 


1 [This controversy is described in some detail in the first chapter of Freud’s Auto- 
biographical Study (1925 d).\ 




G. Absurd Dreams 


447 


one who, after long delays, had been appointed to a professorship only a 
few days before his death. 1 


v 

Here is yet another absurd dream which plays about with numbers. 
One of my acquaintances, Herr M., had been attacked in an essay with an un- 
justifiable degree of violence, as we all thought — by no less a person than 
Goethe. Herr M. was naturally crushed by the attack. He complained of it bit- 
terly to some company at table; his veneration for Goethe had not been affected, 
however, by this personal experience. I tried to throw a little light on the 
chronological data, ivhich seemed to me improbable. Goethe died in 1832. 
Since his attack on Herr M. must naturally have been made earlier than that, 
Herr M. must have been quite a young man at the time. It seemed to be a 
plausible notion that he ivas eighteen. I ivas not quite sure, however, what year 
we ivere actually in, so that my whole calculation melted into obscurity. Inci- 
dentally, the attack was contained in Goethe’s well-knoivn essay on ‘Nature. ’ 

We shall quickly find means of justifying the nonsense in this dream. 
Herr M., whom I had got to know among some company at table, had not 
long before asked me to examine his brother, who was showing signs of 
general paralysis. The suspicion was correct; on the occasion of this visit an 
awkward episode occurred, for in the course of his conversation the patient 
for no accountable reason gave his brother away by talking of his youthful 
follies. I had asked the patient the year of his birth and made him do sev- 
eral small sums so as to test the weakness of his memory — though, inci- 
dentally, he was still able to meet the tests quite well. I could already see 
that I myself behaved like a paralytic in the dream. (/ was not quite sure 
what year we were in.) Another part of the material of the dream was de- 
rived from another recent source. The editor of a medical journal, with 
whom I was on friendly terms, had printed a highly unfavourable, a ‘crush- 
ing’ criticism of my Berlin friend Fl.’s [Fliess’s] last book. The criticism 


1 [This is no doubt a reference to Fliess’s theory of periodicity. 51 = 28 + 23, the 
male and female periods respectively. Cf. Sections I and IV of Kris’s introduction 
to Freud’s correspondence with Fliess (Freud, 1950a)- See also above, pp. 192 ff. — 
The fact that the number 51 occurs several times is referred to on p. 517. The 
analysis of the dream is continued below on pp. 457 ff.] 




448 


VI. The Dream-Work 


had been written by a very youthful reviewer who possessed small judge- 
ment. I thought I had a right to intervene and took the editor to task over 
it. He expressed lively regret at having published the criticism but would 
not undertake to offer any redress. I therefore severed my connection with 
the journal, but in my letter of resignation expressed a hope that our per- 
sonal relations ivould not be affected by the event. The third source of the 
dream was an account I had just heard from a woman patient of her 
brother’s mental illness, and of how he had broken out in a frenzy with 
cries of Naturel Nature!’ The doctors believed that his exclamation came 
from his having read Goethe’s striking essay on that subject and that it 
showed he had been overworking at his studies in natural philosophy. I 
myself preferred to think of the sexual sense in which the word is used 
even by the less educated people here. This idea of mine was at least not 
disproved by the fact that the unfortunate young man subsequently muti- 
lated his own genitals. He was eighteen at the time of his outbreak. 

I may add that my friend’s book which had been so severely criticized 
(‘one wonders whether it is the author or oneself who is crazy,’ another 
reviewer had said) dealt with the chronological data of life and showed that 
the length of Goethe’s life was a multiple of a number [of days] that has a 
significance in biology. So it is easy to see that in the dream I was putting 
myself in my friend’s place. (/ tried to throiv a little light on the chronolog- 
ical data.) But I behaved like a paralytic, and the dream was a mass of ab- 
surdities. Thus the dream-thoughts were saying ironically: Naturally, it’s 
he [my friend F.] who is the crazy fool, and it’s you [the critics] who are 
the men of genius and know better. Surely it can’t by any chance be the 
reverse?’ There were plenty of examples of this reversal in the dream. For 
instance, Goethe attacked the young man, which is absurd, whereas it is 
still easy for quite a young man to attack Goethe, who is immortal. And 
again, I calculated from the year of Goethe’s death, whereas I had made 
the paralytic calculate from the year of his birth. [See p. 342, where this 
dream has already been mentioned.] 

But I have also undertaken to show that no dream is prompted by mo- 
tives other than egoistic ones. [See pp. 285 ffi] So I must explain away the 
fact that in the present dream I made my friend’s cause my own and put 
myself in his place. The strength of my critical conviction in waking life 
is not enough to account for this. The story of the eighteen-year-old pa- 
tient, however, and the different interpretations of his exclaiming Na- 
ture!’ were allusions to the opposition in which I found myself to most 
doctors on account of my belief in the sexual aetiology of the psychoneu- 



G. Absurd Dreams 


449 


roses. I could say to myself: ‘The kind of criticism that has been applied 
to your friend will be applied to you — indeed, to some extent it already 
has been.’ The ‘he’ in the dream can therefore be replaced by ‘we’: ‘Yes, 
you’re quite right, it’s ive who are the fools.’ There was a very clear re- 
minder in the dream that ‘ mea res agitur, 'in the allusion to Goethe’s short 
but exquisitely written essay; for when at the end of my school-days I was 
hesitating in my choice of a career, it was hearing that essay read aloud at 
a public lecture that decided me to take up the study of natural science. 1 2 


VI 

Earlier in this volume I undertook to show that another dream in 
which my own ego did not appear was nevertheless egoistic. On p. 286 I 
reported a short dream to the effect that Professor M. said: ‘My son, the 
My ops . . . , 'and 1 explained that the dream was only an introductory one, 
preliminary to another in which I did play a part. Here is the missing 
main dream, which introduces an absurd and unintelligible verbal form 
which requires an explanation. 

On account of certain events which had occurred in the city of Rome, it 
had become necessary to remove the children to safety, and this was done. The 
scene was then in front of a gateway, double doors in the ancient style (the 
‘Porta Romana ’ at Siena, as I ivas aivare during the dream itself). I was sit- 
ting on the edge of a fountain and was greatly depressed and almost in tears. 
A female figure — an attendant or nun — brought two boys out and handed 
them over to their father, who ivas not myself. The elder of the two was clearly 
my eldest son; I did not see the other one’s face. The woman who brought out 
the boy asked him to kiss her good-bye. She was noticeable for having a red 
nose. The boy refiised to kiss her, but, holding out his hand in farewell, said 
‘Auf Geseres’ to her, and then ‘Auf Ungeseres’ to the two of us (or to otie 
of us). I had a notion that this last phrase denoted a preference. 1 

This dream was constructed on a tangle of thoughts provoked by a play 
which I had seen, called Das neue Ghetto [The New Ghetto ]. The Jewish 


1 [This dream is further discussed on pp. 456 £; it is also analysed at length, and 
with a few additional details, in Part VI of Freud’s short study On Dreams 
(1901 a), Standard Ed., 5, 662 — An English translation of Goethe’s ‘Fragment 
iiber die Natur’ will be found in Wittels, 1931, 31.] 

2 [The words ‘Geseres ’and ‘Ungeseres, 'neither of them German, are discussed below.] 




450 


VI. The Dream-Work 


problem, concern about the future of one’s children, to whom one cannot 
give a country of their own, concern about educating them in such a way 
that they can move freely across frontiers — all of this was easily recogniza- 
ble among the relevant dream-thoughts. 

By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept. ’ Siena, like Rome, is fa- 
mous for its beautiful fountains. If Rome occurred in one of my dreams, 
it was necessary for me to find a substitute for it from some locality known 
to me (see pp. 215 f). Near the Porta Romana in Siena we had seen a large 
and brightly lighted building. We learned that it was the Manicomio, the 
insane asylum. Shortly before I had the dream I had heard that a man of 
the same religious persuasion as myself had been obliged to resign the po- 
sition which he had painfully achieved in a State asylum. 

Our interest is aroused by the phrase ‘ AufGeseres ’ (at a point at which 
the situation in the dream would have led one to expect ‘Auf Wiedersehen ’) 
as well as its quite meaningless opposite Auf Ungeseres! According to in- 
formation I have received from philologists, ‘Geseres’ is a genuine Hebrew 
word derived from a verb goiser, ’and is best translated by ‘imposed suffer- 
ings’ or ‘doom.’ The use of the word in slang would incline one to suppose 
that it meant ‘weeping and wailing.’ ‘Ungeseres’ was a private neologism of 
my own and was the first word to catch my attention, but to begin with I 
could make nothing of it. But the short remark at the end of the dream to 
the effect that ‘Ungeseres’ denoted a preference over ‘Geseres ’ opened the 
door to associations and at the same time to an elucidation of the word. 
An analogous relationship occurs in the case of caviare; unsalted [‘unge- 
salzen ’] caviare is esteemed more highly than salted [‘gesalzen’]. ‘Caviare to 
the general,’ aristocratic pretensions; behind this lay a joking allusion to a 
member of my household who, since she was younger than I, would, I 
hoped, look after my children in the future. This tallied with the fact that 
another member of my household, our excellent nurse, was recognizably 
portrayed in the female attendant or nun in the dream. There was still, 
however, no transitional idea between ‘salted — unsalted’ and ‘Geseres — 
Ungeseres. ’ This was provided by ‘leavened — unleavened’ [ ‘gesduert — 
ungesduert’}. In their flight out of Egypt the Children of Israel had not 
time to allow their dough to rise and, in memory of this, they eat unleav- 
ened bread to this day at Easter. At this point I may insert a sudden associ- 
ation that occurred to me during this portion of the analysis. I remembered 
how, during the previous Easter, my Berlin friend and I had been walking 
through the streets of Breslau, a town in which we were strangers. A little 
girl asked me the way to a particular street, and I was obliged to confess that 



G. Absurd Dreams 


451 


I did not know; and I remarked to my friend: ‘It is to be hoped that when 
she grows up that little girl will show more discrimination in her choice of 
the people whom she gets to direct her.’ Shortly afterwards, I caught sight 
of a door-plate bearing the words ‘Dr. Herodes. Consulting hours: . . .’ ‘Let 
us hope,’ I remarked, ‘that our colleague does not happen to be a children’s 
doctor.’ At this same time my friend had been telling me his views on the 
biological significance of bilateral symmetry and had begun a sentence with 
the words ‘If we had an eye in the middle of our foreheads like a Cyclops . 

. .’ This led to the Professor’s remark in the introductory dream, ‘My son, 
the My ops . . and I had now been led to the principal source of ‘Geseres. ’ 
Many years before, when this son of Professor M.’s, today an independent 
thinker, was still sitting at his school-desk, he was attacked by a disease of 
the eyes which, the doctor declared, gave cause for anxiety. He explained 
that so long as it remained on one side it was of no importance, but that if it 
passed over to the other eye it would be a serious matter. The affection 
cleared up completely in the one eye; but shortly afterwards signs in fact ap- 
peared of the other one being affected. The boy’s mother, terrified, at once 
sent for the doctor to the remote spot in the country where they were stay- 
ing. The doctor, however, now went over to the other side. ‘Why are you 
making such a “Geseres’?’ he shouted at the mother, ‘if one side has got well, 
so will the other. ’And he was right. 

And now we must consider the relation of all this to me and my fam- 
ily. The school-desk at which Professor M.’s son took his first steps in 
knowledge was handed over by his mother as a gift to my eldest son, into 
whose mouth I put the farewell phrases in the dream. It is easy to guess 
one of the wishes to which this transference gave rise. But the construc- 
tion of the desk was also intended to save the child from being short- 
sighted and one-sided. Hence the appearance in the dream of My ops’ (and, 
behind it, ‘Cyclops’) and the reference to bilaterality. My concern about 
one-sidedness had more than one meaning: it could refer not only to 
physical one-sidedness but also to one-sidedness of intellectual develop- 
ment. May it not even be that it was precisely this concern which, in its 
crazy way, the scene in the dream was contradicting? After the child had 
turned to one side to say farewell words, he turned to the other side to say 
the contrary, as though to restore the balance. It ivas as though he ivas act- 
ing with due attention to bilateral symmetry! 


1 [The German ‘Myop ’ is an ad hoc form constructed on the pattern of ‘Zyklop. ’] 




452 


VI. The Dream-Work 


Dreams, then, are often most profound when they seem most crazy. In 
every epoch of history those who have had something to say but could not 
say it without peril have eagerly assumed a fool’s cap. The audience at 
whom their forbidden speech was aimed tolerated it more easily if they 
could at the same time laugh and flatter themselves with the reflection that 
the unwelcome words were clearly nonsensical. The Prince in the play, 
who had to disguise himself as a madman, was behaving just as dreams do 
in reality; so that we can say of dreams what Hamlet said of himself, con- 
cealing the true circumstances under a cloak of wit and unintelligibility: ‘I 
am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly, I know a hawk 
from a hand-saw!’ 1 

Thus I have solved the problem of absurdity in dreams by showing that 
the dream-thoughts are never absurd — never, at all events, in the dreams 
of sane people — and that the dream-work produces absurd dreams and 
dreams containing individual absurd elements if it is faced with the neces- 
sity of representing any criticism, ridicule or derision which may be pres- 
ent in the dream-thoughts. 2 

My next task is to show that the dream-work consists in nothing more 
than a combination of the three factors I have mentioned 3 — and of a 
fourth which I have still to mention [see p. 493] ; that it carries out no 
other function than the translation of dream-thoughts in accordance with 
the four conditions to which it is subject; and that the question whether 
the mind operates in dreams with all its intellectual faculties or with only 
a part of them is wrongly framed and disregards the facts. Since, however, 


1 [Hamlet, II, 2.] This dream also provides a good example of the generally valid 
truth that dreams which occur during the same night, even though they are rec- 
ollected as separate, spring from the ground-work of the same thoughts. [See 
above, pp. 348 £] Incidentally, the situation in the dream of my removing my 
children to safety from the City of Rome was distorted by being related back to 
an analogous event that occurred in my own childhood: I was envying some rel- 
atives who, many years earlier, had had an opportunity of removing their chil- 
dren to another country. 

2 [The subject of absurdity in dreams is also discussed in the course of Chapter VI 
of Freud’s book on jokes (1905c). — Towards the end of Section I of the case his- 
tory of the ‘Rat Man’ (1909 d), Freud remarks in a footnote that the same mech- 
anism is used in obsessional neuroses.] 

3 [Viz. condensation, displacement and consideration for representability.] 




G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams 


453 


there are plenty of dreams in whose content judgements are passed, criti- 
cisms made, and appreciations expressed, in which surprise is felt at some 
particular element of the dream, in which explanations are attempted and 
argumentations embarked upon, I must now proceed to meet the objec- 
tions arising from facts of this kind by producing some chosen examples. 

My reply [put briefly] is as follows: Everything that appears in dreams 
as the ostensible activity of the function of judgement is to be regarded not as 
an intellectual achievement of the dream-ivork but as belonging to the mate- 
rial of the dream-thoughts and as having been lifted from them into the man- 
ifest content of the dream as a ready-made structure. I can even carry this 
assertion further. Even the judgements made after waking upon a dream 
that has been remembered, and the feelings called up in us by the repro- 
duction of such a dream, form part, to a great extent, of the latent con- 
tent of the dream and are to be included in its interpretation. 


i 

I have already quoted a striking example of this [p. 347 fl] 1 A woman 
patient refused to tell me a dream of hers because ‘it was not clear 
enough.’ She had seen someone in the dream but did not know whether 
it was her husband or her father. There then followed a second piece of 
dream in which a dust-bin [ Misttriigerl ] appeared, and this gave rise to 
the following recollection. When she had first set up house she had jok- 
ingly remarked on one occasion in the presence of a young relative who 
was visiting in the house that her next job was to get hold of a new dust- 
bin. The next morning one arrived for her, but it was filled with lilies of 
the valley. This piece of the dream served to represent a common [Ger- 
man] phrase ‘not grown on my own manure.’ 2 When the analysis was 
completed, it turned out that the dream-thoughts were concerned with 
the after-effects of a story, which the dreamer had heard when she was 
young, of how a girl had had a baby and of how it was not clear ivho the 
father really was. Here, then, the dream-representation had overflowed 


1 [Another example was also quoted in the same passage, p. 347.] 

2 [ ‘Nicbt auf meinem eigenetz Mist gewachsen ’ — meaning ‘I am not responsible for 
that,’ or ‘It’s not my baby.’ The German word 'Mist, ’properly meaning manure, 
is used in slang for ‘rubbish’ and occurs in this sense in the Viennese term for a 
dust-bin: ‘Misttriigerl. ’] 




454 


VI. The Dream-Work 


into the waking thoughts: one of the elements of the dream-thoughts had 
found representation in a waking judgement passed upon the dream as a 
whole. 


ii 

Here is a similar case. One of my patients had a dream which struck 
him as interesting, for immediately after waking he said to himself: ‘I 
must tell the doctor that. 'The dream was analysed and produced the clear- 
est allusions to a liaison which he had started during the treatment and 
which he had decided to himself not to tell me about . 1 


hi 

Here is a third example, one from my own experience. / was going to 
the hospital with P. through a district in which there ivere houses and gar- 
dens. At the same time I had a notion that I had often seen this district before 
in dreams. I did not know my way about very ivell. He showed me a road 
that led round the corner to a restaurant (indoors, not a garden). There I 
asked for Frau Doni and was told that she lived at the back in a small room 
with three children. I went towards it, but before I got there met an indistinct 
figure with my two little girls; I took them with me after I had stood with 
them for a little ivhile. Some sort of reproach against my wife, for having left 
them there. 

When I woke up I had a feeling of great satisfaction, the reason for 
which I explained to myself as being that I was going to discover from this 
analysis the meaning of ‘I’ve dreamt of that before .’ 1 In fact, however, the 
analysis taught me nothing of the kind; what it did show me was that the 
satisfaction belonged to the latent content of the dream and not to any 
judgement upon it. My satisfaction was with the fact that my marriage had 
brought me children. P. was a person whose course in life lay for some time 


1 [See above, pp. 353 £] A protracted discussion on this subject has run through 
recent volumes of the Revue Philosophique [1896-98] under the title of 
‘Paramnesia in Dreams’. — [This dream is referred to again on pp. 483 f. ] 




G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams 


455 


alongside mine, who then outdistanced me both socially and materially, 
but whose marriage was childless. The two events which occasioned the 
dream will serve, instead of a complete analysis, to indicate its meaning. 
The day before, I had read in a newspaper the announcement of the death 

of Frau Dona A y (which I turned into ‘Doni’ in the dream), who had 

died in childbirth. My wife told me that the dead woman had been looked 
after by the same midwife who had attended her at the birth of our two 
youngest children. The name ‘Dona’ had struck me because I had met it 
for the first time a short while before in an English novel. The second oc- 
casion for the dream was provided by the date on which it occurred. It was 
on the night before the birthday of my eldest boy — who seems to have 
some poetic gifts. 


IV 

I was left with the same feeling of satisfaction when I woke from the 
absurd dream of my father having played a political part among the Mag- 
yars after his death; and the reason I gave myself for this feeling was that 
it was a continuation of the feeling that accompanied the last piece of the 
dream. [See p. 436.] / remembered hoiv like Garibaldi he had looked on his 
death-bed and felt glad that it had come true. . . . ( There was a continuation 
which I had forgotten). The analysis enabled me to fill in this gap in the 
dream. It was a mention of my second son, to whom I had given the first 
name of a great historical figure [Cromwell] who had powerfully attracted 
me in my boyhood, especially since my visit to England. During the year 
before the child’s birth I had made up my mind to use this name if it 
were a son and I greeted the new-born baby with it with a feeling of high 
satisfaction. (It is easy to see how the suppressed megalomania of fathers 
is transferred in their thoughts on to their children, and it seems quite 
probable that this is one of the ways in which the suppression of that feel- 
ing, which becomes necessary in actual life, is carried out.) The little 
boy’s right to appear in the context of this dream was derived from the 
fact that he had just had the same misadventure — easily forgivable both 
in a child and in a dying man — of soiling his bedclothes. Compare in this 
connection Stuhlrichter [‘presiding judge,’ literally ‘chair-’ or ‘stool- 
judge’] and the wish expressed in the dream to stand before one’s chil- 
dren’s eyes great and unsullied. [See below, p. 483.] 



456 


VI. The Dream-Work 


v 

I now turn to consider expressions of judgement passed in the dream 
itself but not continued into waking life or transposed into it. In looking 
for examples of these, my task will be greatly assisted if I may make use of 
dreams which I have already recorded with other aims in view. The dream 
of Goethe’s attack on Herr M. [pp. 447 ff] appears to contain a whole 
number of acts of judgement. ‘I tried to throiv a little light on the chrono- 
logical data, which seemed to me improbable. ’This has every appearance of 
being a criticism of the absurd idea that Goethe should have made a liter- 
ary attack on a young man of my acquaintance. ‘It seemed to be a plausible 
notion that he was eighteen. ’ This, again, sounds exactly like the outcome 
of a calculation, though, it is true, of a feeble-minded one. Lastly, ‘/ was 
not quite sure what year we were in ’seems like an instance of uncertainty or 
doubt in a dream. 

Thus all of these seemed to be acts of judgement made for the first 
time in the dream. But analysis showed that their wording can be taken 
in another way, in the light of which they become indispensable for the 
dream’s interpretation, while at the same time every trace of absurdity is 
removed. The sentence ‘I tried to throw a little light oti the chronological 
data ’ put me in the place of my friend [Fliess] who was in fact seeking to 
throw light on the chronological data of life. This deprives the sentence 
of its significance as a judgement protesting against the absurdity of the 
preceding sentences. The interpolated phrase, ‘which seemed to me im- 
probable,’ belonged with the subsequent one, ‘It seemed to be a plausible 
notion.’ I had used almost these precise words to the lady who had told 
her brother’s case-history. It seems to me an improbable notion that his 
cries of “Nature! Nature!” had anything to do with Goethe; it seems to me 
far more plausible that the words had the sexual meaning you are familiar 
with.’ It is true that here a judgement was passed — not in the dream, 
however, but in reality, and on an occasion which was recollected and ex- 
ploited by the dream-thoughts. The content of the dream took over this 
judgement just like any other fragment of the dream-thoughts. The num- 
ber ‘18’ to which the judgement in the dream was senselessly attached, 
retains a trace of the real context from which the judgement was torn. 
Lastly, ‘I was not quite sure what year we ivere in’ was intended merely to 
carry further my identification with the paralytic patient in my examina- 
tion of whom this point had really arisen. 



G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams 


457 


The resolution of what are ostensibly acts of judgement in dreams may 
serve to remind us of the rules laid down at the beginning of this book [pp. 
129 f.] for carrying out the work of interpretation: namely, that we should 
disregard the apparent coherence between a dream’s constituents as an 
unessential illusion, and that we should trace back the origin of each of its 
elements on its own account. A dream is a conglomerate which, for pur- 
poses of investigation, must be broken up once more into fragments. [Cf. 
p. 428 £] On the other hand, however, it will be observed that a psychical 
force is at work in dreams which creates this apparent connectedness, 
which, that is to say, submits the material produced by the dream-work to 
a ‘secondary revision.’ This brings us face to face with the manifestations 
of a force whose importance we shall later [pp. 493 f£] assess as the fourth 
of the factors concerned in the construction of dreams. 


VI 

Here is a further instance of a process of judgement at work in a dream 
that I have already recorded. In the absurd dream of the communication 
from the town council [pp. 447 ff] I asked: ‘Did you get married soon after 
that?’ I calculated that, of course, I was born in 1856, which seemed to be the 
year which immediately followed the year in question. All of this was clothed 
in the form of a set of logical conclusions. My father had married in 1851, 
immediately after his attack; I, of course, was the eldest of the family and 
had been born in 1856; Q.E.D. As we know, this false conclusion was 
drawn in the interests of wish-fulfilment; and the predominant dream- 
thought ran: 'Four or five years, that’s no time at all; it doesn’t count.’ Every 
step in this set of logical conclusions, however alike in their content and 
their form, could be explained in another way as having been determined 
by the dream-thoughts. It was the patient, of whose long analysis my col- 
league had fallen foul, who had decided to get married immediately the 
treatment was finished. The manner of my interview with my father in the 
dream was like an interrogation or examination, and reminded me too of a 
teacher at the University who used to take down exhaustive particulars from 
the students who were enrolling themselves for his lectures: ‘Date of 
birth?’ — ‘1856.’ — ‘Patre?’ In reply to this one gave one’s father’s first name 
with a Latin termination; and we students assumed that the Hofrat drew 
conclusions from the first name of the father which could not always be 
drawn from that of the student himself. Thus the drawing of the conclusion 



458 


VI. The Dream-Work 


in the dream was no more than a repetition of the drawing of a conclusion 
which appeared as a piece of the material of the dream-thoughts. Something 
new emerges from this. If a conclusion appears in the content of the dream 
there is no question that it is derived from the dream-thoughts; but it may 
either be present in these as a piece of recollected material or it may link a 
series of dream-thoughts together in a logical chain. In any case, however, a 
conclusion in a dream represents a conclusion in the dream-thoughts. 1 

At this point we may resume our analysis of the dream. The interro- 
gation by the professor led to a recollection of the register of University 
Students (which in my time was drawn up in Latin). It led further to 
thoughts upon the course of my academic studies. The five years which 
are prescribed for medical studies were once again too few for me. 1 quietly 
went on with my work for several more years; and in my circle of acquain- 
tances I was regarded as an idler and it was doubted whether I should ever 
get through. Thereupon I quickly decided to take my examinations and I 
got through them in spite ofi the delay. Here was a fresh reinforcement of 
the dream-thoughts with which I was defiantly confronting my critics: 
‘Even though you won’t believe it because I’ve taken my time, I shall get 
through; I shall bring my medical training to a conclusion. Things have of- 
ten turned out like that before.’ 

This same dream in its opening passage contained some sentences which 
could hardly be refused the name of an argument. This argument was not 
even absurd; it might just as well have occurred in waking thought: I ivas 
amused in the dream at the communication from the town council since, in the 
first place, I was not yet in the world in 1851 and, in the second place, my fa- 
ther, to whom it might have related, was already dead. Both of these state- 
ments were not only correct in themselves but agreed precisely with the real 
arguments that I should bring up if I were actually to receive a communica- 
tion of that kind. My earlier analysis of the dream showed that it grew out 
of deeply embittered and derisive dream-thoughts. If we may also assume 
that there were strong reasons present for the activity of the censorship, we 
shall understand that the dream-work had every motive for producing, a 
perfectly valid refutation of an absurd suggestion on the model contained in 
the dream-thoughts. The analysis showed, however, that the dream-work 


1 These findings are in some respects a correction of what I have said above (p. 328 
f.) on the representation of logical relations in dreams. This earlier passage de- 
scribes the general behaviour of the dream-work but takes no account of the finer 
and more precise details of its functioning. 




G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams 


459 


did not have a free hand in framing this parallel but was obliged, for that 
purpose, to use material from the dream-thoughts. It was just as though 
there were an algebraic equation containing (in addition to numerals) plus 
and minus signs, indices and radical signs, and as though someone were to 
copy out the equation without understanding it, taking over both the oper- 
ational symbols and the numerals into his copy but mixing them all up to- 
gether. The two arguments [in the dream-content] could be traced back 
to the following material. It was distressing to me to think that some of the 
premises which underlay my psychological explanations of the psycho- 
neuroses were bound to excite scepticism and laughter when they were first 
met with. For instance, I had been driven to assume that impressions from 
the second year of life, and sometimes even from the first, left a lasting trace 
on the emotional life of those who were later to fall ill, and that these 
impressions — though distorted and exaggerated in many ways by the 
memory — might constitute the first and deepest foundation for hysterical 
symptoms. Patients, to whom I explained this at some appropriate moment, 
used to parody this newly-gained knowledge by declaring that they were 
ready to look for recollections dating from a time at which they were not yet 
alive. My discovery of the unexpected part played by their father in the ear- 
liest sexual impulses of female patients might well be expected to meet with 
a similar reception (see the discussion on pp. 276). Nevertheless, it was my 
well-grounded conviction that both of these hypotheses were true. By way 
of confirmation I called to mind some instances in which the death of the 
father occurred while the child was at a very early age and in which later 
events, otherwise inexplicable, proved that the child had nevertheless re- 
tained unconsciously recollections of the figure which had disappeared so 
early in his life. I was aware that these two assertions of mine rested on the 
drawing of conclusions whose validity would be disputed. It was therefore an 
achievement of wish-fulfilment when the material of precisely those conclu- 
sions which I was afraid ivould be contested was employed by the dream-work 
for drawing conclusions ivhich it ivas impossible to contest. 


VII 

At the beginning of a dream, which I have so far hardly touched upon 
[see p. 422], there was a clear expression of astonishment at the subject 
which had cropped up. Old Briicke must have set me some task; strangely 
enough, it related to a dissection of the lower part of my own body, my pelvis 



460 


VI. The Dream-Work 


and legs, which I saw before me as though in the dissecting-room, but without 
noticing their absence in myself and also without a trace of any gruesome feel- 
ing. Louise N. was standing beside me and doing the work with me. The 
pelvis had been eviscerated, and it was visible noiv in its superior, now in its 
inferior, aspect, the two being mixed together. Thick flesh-coloured protuber- 
ances [which, in the dream itself, made me think of haemorrhoids) could be 
seen. Something which lay over it and was like crumpled silver-paper 1 2 had 
also to be carefully fished out. I was then once more in possession of my legs 
and was making my way through the town. But ( being tired) I took a cab. 
To my astonishment the cab drove in through the door of a house, which 
opened and allowed it to pass along a passage which turned a corner at its end 
and finally led into the open air again. 1 Finally I was making a journey 
through a changing landscape ivith an Alpine guide who was carrying my be- 
longings. Part of the way he carried me too, out of consideration for my tired 
legs. The ground ivas boggy; we went round the edge; people were sitting on the 
ground like Red Indians or gipsies — among them a girl. Before this I had been 
making my own way forward over the slippery ground with a constant feeling 
of surprise that I was able to do it so well after the dissection. At last ive reached 
a small wooden house at the end of which was an open ivindoiv. There the 
guide set me down and laid tivo ivooden boards, which were standing ready, 
upon the window-sill, so as to bridge the chasm ivhich had to be crossed over 
from the witidow. At that point I really became frightened about my legs, btit 
instead of the expected crossing, I saw two grown-up men lying on wooden 
benches that ivere along the ivalls of the hut, and what seemed to be tivo chil- 
dren sleeping beside them. It was as though what was going to make the cross- 
ing possible was not the boards but the children. I awoke in a mental fright. 

Anyone who has formed even the slightest idea of the extent of conden- 
sation in dreams will easily imagine what a number of pages would be filled 
by a full analysis of this dream. Fortunately, however, in the present context 
1 need only take up one point in it, which provides an example of astonish- 
ment in dreams, as exhibited in the interpolation ‘strangely enough. ’ The fol- 
lowing was the occasion of the dream. Louise N., the lady who was assisting 
me in my job in the dream, had been calling on me. ‘Lend me something 
to read,’ she had said. I offered her Rider Haggard’s She. ‘A strange book, 


1 Stanniol, which was an allusion to the book by Stannius on the nervous system 
of fishes. (Cf. loc. cit.) 

2 It was the place on the ground-floor of my block of flats where the tenants keep 
their perambulators; but it was overdetermined in several other ways. 




G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams 


461 


but full of bidden meaning,’ I began to explain to her; ‘the eternal femi- 
nine, the immortality of our emotions . . Here she interrupted me: ‘I 
know it already. Have you nothing of your own?’ — ‘No, my own immortal 
works have not yet been written.’ — ‘Well, when are we to expect these so- 
called ultimate explanations of yours which you’ve promised even we shall 
find readable?’ she asked, with a touch of sarcasm. At that point I saw that 
someone else was admonishing me through her mouth and I was silent. I 
reflected on the amount of self-discipline it was costing me to offer the pub- 
lic even my book upon dreams — I should have to give away so much of my 
own private character in it. 

Das Beste was du wissen kannst, 

Darfst du den Buben doch nicht sagen. 1 

The task which was imposed on me in the dream of carrying out a dis- 
section of my own body was thus my self analysis 2 which was linked up 
with my giving an account of my dreams. Old Briicke came in here ap- 
propriately; even in the first years of my scientific work it happened that 
I allowed a discovery of mine to lie fallow until an energetic remonstrance 
on his part drove me into publishing it. The further thoughts which were 
started up by my conversation with Louise N. went too deep to become 
conscious. They were diverted in the direction of the material that had 
been stirred up in me by the mention of Rider Haggard’s She. The judge- 
ment ‘strangely enough’ went back to that book and to another one, Heart 
of the World, by the same author; and numerous elements of the dream 
were derived from these two imaginative novels. The boggy ground over 
which people had to be carried, and the chasm which they had to cross 
by means of boards brought along with them, were taken from She; the 
Red Indians, the girl and the wooden house were taken from Heart of the 
World. In both novels the guide is a woman; both are concerned with per- 
ilous journeys; while She describes an adventurous road that had scarcely 
ever been trodden before, leading into an undiscovered region. The tired 
feeling in my legs, according to a note which I find I made upon the 
dream, had been a real sensation during the daytime. It probably went 


1 [See footnote, p. 166.] 

2 [Freud’s self-analysis during the years before the publication of this book is one 
of the themes of his correspondence with Fliess (Freud, 1950 a). Cf. Part III of 
Kris’s introduction to the latter volume.] 




462 


VI. The Dream-Work 


along with a tired mood and a doubting thought: ‘How much longer will 
my legs carry me?’ The end of the adventure in She is that the guide, in- 
stead of finding immortality for herself and the others, perishes in the 
mysterious subterranean fire. A fear of that kind was unmistakably active 
in the dream-thoughts. The Vooden house’ was also, no doubt, a coffin, 
that is to say, the grave. But the dream-work achieved a masterpiece in 
its representation of this most unwished-for of all thoughts by a wish- 
fulfilment. For I had already been in a grave once, but it was an excavated 
Etruscan grave near Orvieto, a narrow chamber with two stone benches 
along its walls, on which the skeletons of two grown-up men were lying. 
The inside of the wooden house in the dream looked exactly like it, ex- 
cept that the stone was replaced by wood. The dream seems to have been 
saying: ‘If you must rest in a grave, let it be the Etruscan one.’ And, by 
making this replacement, it transformed the gloomiest of expectations 
into one that was highly desirable. 1 Unluckily, as we are soon to hear [pp. 
466 ffi], a dream can turn into its opposite the idea accompanying an 
affect but not always the affect itself. Accordingly, I woke up in a ‘ mental 
fright, ’ even after the successful emergence of the idea that children may 
perhaps achieve what their father has failed to — a fresh allusion to the 
strange novel in which a person’s identity is retained through a series of 
generations for over two thousand years. 2 3 


VIII 

Included in yet another of my dreams there was an expression of sur- 
prise at something I had experienced in it; but the surprise was accompa- 
nied by such a striking, farfetched and almost brilliant attempt at an 
explanation that, if only on its account, I cannot resist submitting the 
whole dream to analysis, quite apart from the dream’s possessing two other 
points to attract our interest. I was travelling along the Siidbahn railway- 
line during the night of July 1 8 — 1 9th, and in my sleep I heard: 'Holl- 
thurnf ten minutes’ being called out. I at once thought of holo-thurians 
[sea-slugs] — of a natural history museum — that this was the spot at ivhich 


1 [This detail is used as an illustration in Chapter III of Freud’s Future ofat^ Illu- 
sion (1927c).] 

1 [This dream is further discussed below on pp. 483 £] 

3 [Not the name of any real place.] 




G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams 


463 


valiant men had fought in vain against the superior poiver of the ruler of their 
country — yes:, the Counter-Reformation in Austria — it was as though it ivere 
a place in Styria or the Tyrol. I then saw indistinctly a small museum, in which 
the relics or belongings of these men were preserved. I shoidd have liked to get 
out, but hesitated to do so. There were women with fruit on the platform. They 
ivere crouching on the ground and holding up their baskets invitingly. — I hes- 
itated because I was not sure ivhether there was time, but ive ivere still not 
moving. — I was suddenly in another compartment, in which the upholstery 
and seats were so narrow that one’s back pressed directly against the back of the 
carriage. 1 I was surprised by this, but I reflected that I might have changed 
carriages while I was in a sleeping state. There were several people, in- 
cluding an English brother and sister; a row of books were distinctly visible on 
a shelf on the wall. I saw ' The Wealth of Nations ’ and ‘Matter and Motion ’ 
(by Clerk-Maxwell ), a thick volume and bound in brown cloth. The man 
asked his sister about a book by Schiller, whether she had forgotten it. It seemed 
as though the books were sometimes mine and sometimes theirs. I felt inclined 
at that point to intervene in the conversation in a confirmatory or substantiat- 
ing sense. ... I woke up perspiring all over, because all the windows were 
shut. The train was drawn up at Marburg [in Styria] . 

While I was writing the dream down a new piece of it occurred to me, 
which my memory had tried to pass over. I said [in English] to the brother 
and sister, referring to a particular work: ‘It is from . . . ,’ but corrected myself: 
‘It is by .. .’ ‘Yes,’ the man commented to his sister, ‘he said that right. ’ 1 2 

The dream opened with the name of the station, which must no 
doubt have partly woken me up. I replaced its name, Marburg, by Holl- 
thurn. The fact that I heard ‘Marburg’ when it was first called out, or per- 
haps later, was proved by the mentioning in the dream of Schiller, who 
was born at Marburg, though not at the one in Styria . 3 I was making my 


1 This description was unintelligible even to myself; but I have followed the fun- 
damental rule of reporting a dream in the words which occurred to me as I was 
writing it down. The wording chosen is itself part of what is represented by the 
dream. [Cf. p. 516.] 

2 [This piece of the dream is further considered on pp. 522 £] 

3 [ Footnote added 1909:] Schiller was not born at any Marburg, but at Marbach, 
as every German school-boy knows, and as I knew myself. This was one more 
of those mistakes (see above, p. 219 n.) which slip in as a substitute for an in- 
tentional falsification at some other point, and which I have tried to explain in 
my Psycho-pathology of Everyday Life, [1901^, Chapter X, No. 1.] 




464 


VI. The Dream-Work 


journey on that occasion, although I was travelling first class, under very 
uncomfortable conditions. The train was packed full, and in my com- 
partment I had found a lady and gentleman who appeared to be very 
aristocratic and had not the civility, or did not think it worth the trouble, 
to make any disguise of their annoyance at my intrusion. My polite greet- 
ing met with no response. Although the man and his wife were sitting 
side by side (with their backs to the engine) the woman nevertheless made 
haste, under my very eyes, to engage the window-seat facing her by put- 
ting an umbrella on it. The door was shut immediately, and pointed re- 
marks were exchanged between them on the subject of opening windows. 
They had probably seen at once that I was longing for some fresh air. It 
was a hot night and the atmosphere in the completely closed compart- 
ment soon became suffocating. My experiences of travelling have taught 
me that conduct of this ruthless and overbearing kind is a characteristic 
of people who are travelling on a free or half-price ticket. When the 
ticket-collector came and 1 showed him the ticket I had bought at such 
expense, there fell from the lady’s mouth, in haughty and almost menac- 
ing tones, the words: ‘My husband has a free pass.’ She was an imposing 
figure with discontented features, of an age not far from the time of the 
decay of feminine beauty; the man uttered not a word but sat there mo- 
tionless. I attempted to sleep. In my dream I took fearful vengeance on 
my disagreeable companions; no one could suspect what insults and hu- 
miliations lay concealed behind the broken fragments of the first half of 
the dream. When this need had been satisfied a second wish made itself 
felt — to change compartments. The scene is changed so often in dreams, 
and without the slightest objection being raised, that it would not have 
been in the least surprising if I had promptly replaced my travelling com- 
panions by more agreeable ones derived from my memory. But here was 
a case in which something resented the change of scene and thought it 
necessary to explain it. How did I suddenly come to be in another com- 
partment? I had no recollection of having changed. There could be only 
one explanation; I must have left the carriage while I was in a sleeping 
state — a rare event, of which, however, examples are to be found in the 
experience of a neuropathologist. We know of people who have gone 
upon railway journeys in a twilight state, without betraying their abnor- 
mal condition by any signs, till at some point in the journey they have 
suddenly come to themselves completely and been amazed at the gap in 
their memory. In the dream itself, accordingly, I was declaring myself to 
be one of these cases of ‘automatisme ambulatoire. ’ 



G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams 


465 


Analysis made it possible to find another solution. The attempt at an ex- 
planation, which seemed so striking when I was obliged to ascribe it to the 
dream-work, was not an original one of my own, but was copied from the 
neurosis of one of my patients. I have already spoken elsewhere [pp. 2 77 £] 
of a highly educated and, in real life, softhearted man who, shordy after the 
death of his parents, began to reproach himself with having murderous in- 
clinations, and then fell a victim to the precautionary measures which he 
was obliged to adopt as a safeguard. It was a case of severe obsessions accom- 
panied by complete insight. To begin with, walking through the streets was 
made a burden to him by a compulsion to make certain where every single 
person he met disappeared to; if anyone suddenly escaped his watchful eye, 
he was left with a distressing feeling and the idea that he might possibly have 
got rid of him. What lay behind this was, among other things, a ‘Cain’ 
phantasy — for ‘all men are brothers.’ Owing to the impossibility of carrying 
out this task, he gave up going for walks and spent his life incarcerated be- 
tween his own four walls. But reports of murders which had been commit- 
ted outside were constandy being brought into his room by the newspapers, 
and his conscience suggested to him, in the form of a doubt, that he might 
be the wanted murderer. The certainty that he had in fact not left his house 
for weeks protected him from these charges for a while, till one day the pos- 
sibility came into his head that he might have left his house while he was in an 
unconscious state and have thus been able to commit the murder without 
knowing anything about it. From that time onwards he locked the front 
door of the house and gave the key to his old housekeeper with strict in- 
structions never to let it fall into his hands even if he asked for it. 

This, then, was the origin of my attempted explanation to the effect 
that I had changed carriages while I was in an unconscious state; it had 
been carried over ready-made into the dream from the material of the 
dream-thoughts, and was evidently intended in the dream to serve the 
purpose of identifying me with the figure of this patient. My recollection 
of him had been aroused by an easy association. My last night-journey, a 
few weeks earlier, had been made in the company of this very man. He was 
cured, and was travelling with me into the provinces to visit his relatives, 
who had sent for me. We had a compartment to ourselves; we left all the 
windows open all through the night and had a most entertaining time for 
as long as I stayed awake. I knew that the root of his illness had been hos- 
tile impulses against his father, dating from his childhood and involving a 
sexual situation. In so far, therefore, as I was identifying myself with him, 
I was seeking to confess to something analogous. And in fact the second 



466 


VI. The Dream-Work 


scene of the dream ended in a somewhat extravagant phantasy that my 
two elderly travelling companions had treated me in such a stand-offish 
way because my arrival had prevented the affectionate exchanges which 
they had planned for the night. This phantasy went back, however, to a 
scene of early childhood in which the child, probably driven by sexual 
curiosity, had forced his way into his parents’ bedroom and been turned 
out of it by his father’s orders. 

It is unnecessary, I think, to accumulate further examples. They would 
merely serve to confirm what we have gathered from those I have already 
quoted — that an act of judgement in a dream is only a repetition of some 
prototype in the dream- thoughts. As a rule, the repetition is ill-applied 
and interpolated into an inappropriate context, but occasionally, as in our 
last instances, it is so neatly employed that to begin with it may give the 
impression of independent intellectual activity in the dream. From this 
point we might turn our attention to the psychical activity which, though 
it does not appear to accompany the construction of dreams invariably, 
yet, whenever it does so, is concerned to fuse together elements in a dream 
which are of a disparate origin into a whole which shall make sense and 
be without contradiction. Before approaching that subject, however, we 
are under an urgent necessity to consider the expressions of affect which 
occur in dreams and to compare them with the affects which analysis un- 
covers in the dream-thoughts. 


(H) 

AFFECTS IN DREAMS 

A shrewd observation made by Strieker [1879, 51] has drawn our at- 
tention to the fact that the expression of affect in dreams cannot be dealt 
with in the same contemptuous fashion in which, after waking, we are ac- 
customed to dismiss their content. ‘If I am afraid of robbers in a dream, the 
robbers, it is true, are imaginary — but the fear is real.’ [Cf. p. 101.] And 
this is equally true if I feel glad in a dream. Our feeling tells us that an af- 
fect experienced in a dream is in no way inferior to one of equal intensity 
experienced in waking life; and dreams insist with greater energy upon 
their right to be included among our real mental experiences in respect to 



H. Affects in Dreams 


467 


their affective than in respect to their ideational content. In our waking 
state, however, we cannot in fact include them in this way, because we can- 
not make any psychical assessment of an affect unless it is linked to a piece 
of ideational material. If the affect and the idea are incompatible in their 
character and intensity, our waking judgement is at a loss. 

It has always been a matter for surprise that in dreams the ideational 
content is not accompanied by the affective consequences that we should 
regard as inevitable in waking thought. Striimpel [1877, 27 f.] declared 
that in dreams ideas are denuded of their psychical values [cf. pp. 82 f.]. 
But there is no lack in dreams of instances of a contrary kind, where an 
intense expression of affect appears in connection with subject-matter 
which seems to provide no occasion for any such expression. In a dream 
I may be in a horrible, dangerous and disgusting situation without feeling 
any fear or repulsion; while another time, on the contrary, I may be terri- 
fied at something harmless and delighted at something childish. 

This particular enigma of dream-life vanishes more suddenly, perhaps, 
and more completely than any other, as soon as we pass over from the man- 
ifest to the latent content of the dream. We need not bother about the 
enigma, since it no longer exists. Analysis shows us that the ideational mate- 
rial has undergone displacements and substitutions, ivhereas the affects have re- 
mained unaltered. It is small wonder that the ideational material, which has 
been changed by dream-distortion, should no longer be compatible with the 
affect, which is retained unmodified; nor is there anything left to be surprised 
at after analysis has put the right material back into its former position. 1 


1 \Footnote added 1919:] If I am not greatly mistaken, the first dream that I was 
able to pick up from my grandson, at the age of one year and eight months, re- 
vealed a state of affairs in which the dream-work had succeeded in transforming 
the material of the dream-thoughts into a wish-fulfilment, whereas the affect be- 
longing to them persisted unchanged during the state of sleep. On the night be- 
fore the day on which his father was due to leave for the front, the child cried 
out, sobbing violently: ‘Daddy! Daddy! — baby!’ This can only have meant that 
Daddy and baby were remaining together; whereas the tears recognized the ap- 
proaching farewell. At that time the child was already quite well able to express 
the concept of separation. ‘Fort’ [‘gone’] (replaced by a long-drawn-out and pe- 
culiarly stressed ‘o — o — o’) had been one of his first words, and several months 
before this first dream he had played at ‘gone’ with all his toys. This game went 
back to a successful piece of self-discipline which he had achieved at an early age 
in allowing his mother to leave him and be ‘gone.’ [Cf. Chapter II of Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle (Freud, 1920 g).] 




468 


VI. The Dream-Work 


In the case of a psychical complex which has come under the influence 
of the censorship imposed by resistance, the affects are the constituent 
which is least influenced and which alone can give us a pointer as to how 
we should fill in the missing thoughts. This is seen even more clearly in 
the psychoneuroses than in dreams. Their affects are always appropriate, 
at least in their quality, though we must allow for their intensity being in- 
creased owing to displacements of neurotic attention. If a hysteric is sur- 
prised at having to be so frightened of something trivial or if a man 
suffering from obsessions is surprised at such distressing self-reproaches 
arising out of a mere nothing, they have both gone astray, because they 
regard the ideational content — the triviality or the mere nothing — as 
what is essential; and they put up an unsuccessful fight because they take 
this ideational content as the starting-point of their thought-activity. 
Psycho-analysis can put them upon the right path by recognizing the af- 
fect as being, on the contrary, justified and by seeking out the idea which 
belongs to it but has been repressed and replaced by a substitute. A nec- 
essary premise to all this is that the release of affect and the ideational 
content do not constitute the indissoluble organic unity as which we are 
in the habit of treating them, but that these two separate entities may be 
merely soldered together and can thus be detached from each other by 
analysis. Dream-interpretation shows that this is in fact the case. 

I shall begin by giving an example in which analysis explained the ap- 
parent absence of affect in a case where the ideational content should 
have necessitated its release. 


i 

She saiv three lions in a desert, one ofivhich was laughing; but she was not 
afraid of them. Afierwards, hoivever, she must have run away from them, for 
she was trying to climb up a tree; but she found that her cousin, who was a 
French mistress, was up there already, etc. 

The analysis brought up the following material. The indifferent pre- 
cipitating cause of the dream was a sentence in her English composition: 
‘The mane is the ornament of the lion.’ Her father wore a beard which 
framed his face like a mane. Her English mistress was called Miss Lyons. 
An acquaintance had sent her the ballads of Loewe [the German word for 
‘lion’]. These, then, were the three lions; why should she be afraid of 



H. Affects in Dreams 


469 


them? — She had read a story in which a negro, who had stirred up his 
companions to revolt, was hunted with blood-hounds and climbed up 
a tree to save himself. She went on, in the highest spirits, to produce a 
number of fragmentary recollections, such as the advice on how to catch 
lions from Fliegende Blatter: ‘Take a desert and put it through a sieve and 
the lions will be left over.’ And again, the highly amusing but not very 
proper anecdote of an official who was asked why he did not take more 
trouble to ingratiate himself with the head of his department and replied 
that he had tried to make his way in, but his superior was up there already. 
The whole material became intelligible when it turned out that the lady 
had had a visit on the dream-day from her husband’s superior. He had 
been very polite to her and had kissed her hand and she had not been in 
the least afraid of him, although he was a very ‘big bug’ [in German, 
‘grosses Tier’ = ‘big animal’], and played the part of a ‘social lion' its the 
capital of the country she came from. So this lion was like the lion in A 
Midsummer Night’s Dream that concealed the figure of Snug the joiner; 
and the same is true of all dream-lions of which the dreamer is not afraid. 


n 

As my second example I may quote the dream of the young girl who 
saw her sister’s little son lying dead in his coffin [pp. 176 ff and 267], but 
who, as I may now add, felt neither pain nor grief We know from the 
analysis why this was. The dream merely disguised her wish to see the man 
she was in love with once more; and her affect had to be in tune with her 
wish and not with its disguise. There was thus no occasion for grief. 

In some dreams the affect does at least remain in contact with the 
ideational material which has replaced that to which the affect was origi- 
nally attached. In others, the dissolution of the complex has gone further. 
The affect makes its appearance completely detached from the idea which 
belongs to it and is introduced at some other point in the dream, where it 
fits in with the new arrangement of the dream-elements. The situation is 
then similar to the one we have found in the case of acts of judgement in 
dreams [pp. 452 ff.]. If an important conclusion is drawn in the dream- 
thoughts, the dream also contains one; but the conclusion in the dream 
may be displaced on to quite different material. Such a displacement not 
infrequently follows the principle of antithesis. 



470 


VI. The Dream-Work 


This last possibility is exemplified in the following dream, which I 
have submitted to a most exhaustive analysis. 


hi 

A castle by the sea; later it was no longer immediately on the sea, but on a nar- 
row canal leading to the sea. The Governor was a Herr P. I was standing with 
him in a big reception room — with three windoivs in front of ivhich there rose 
buttresses with what looked like crenellations. I had been attached to the gar- 
rison as something in the nature of a volunteer naval officer. We feared the ar- 
rival of enemy ivarships, since ive were in a state ofivar. Herr P. intended to 
leave, and gave me instructions as to what was to be done if the event that we 
feared took place. His invalid ivife was ivith their children in the threatened 
castle. If the bombardment began, the great hall was to be evacuated. He 
breathed heavily and turned to go; I held him back and asked him how I ivas 
to communicate with him in case of necessity. He added something in reply, but 
immediately fell down dead. No doubt I had put an unnecessary strain upon 
him with my questions. After his death, which made no farther impression on 
me, I ivondered whether his widoiv ivould remain in the castle, whether I 
should report his death to the Higher Command and whether I should take 
over command of the castle as being next in order of rank. I was standing at 
the window, and observing the ships as they went past. They were merchant 
vessels rushing past rapidly through the dark ivater, some of them with several 
funnels and others ivith bulging decks (just like the station buildings in the 
introductory dream — not reported here). Then my brother was standing be- 
side me and we were both looking out of the window at the canal. At the sight 
of one ship we ivere frightened and cried out: Here comes the warship!’ But it 
turned out that it was only the same ships that I already knew returning. There 
now came a small ship, cut off short, in a comic fashion, in the middle. On its 
deck some curious cup-shaped or box-shaped objects were visible. We called out 
with one voice: ‘That’s the breakfast-ship!’ 

The rapid movements of the ships, the deep dark blue of the water 
and the brown smoke from the funnels — all of this combined to create a 
tense and sinister impression. 

The localities in the dream were brought together from several trips of 
mine to the Adriatic (to Miramare, Duino, Venice and Aquileia). A short 
but enjoyable Easter trip which I had made to Aquileia with my brother a 



H. Affects in Dreams 


471 


few weeks before the dream was still fresh in my memory. 1 The dream also 
contained allusions to the maritime war between America and Spain and to 
anxieties to which it had given rise about the fate of my relatives in Amer- 
ica. At two points in the dream affects were in question. At one point an 
affect that was to be anticipated was absent: attention was expressly drawn 
to the fact that the Governor’s death made no impression on me. At an- 
other point, when I thought I saw the warship, I was frightened and felt all 
the sensations of fright in my sleep. In this well-constructed dream the af- 
fects were distributed in such a way that any striking contradiction was 
avoided. There was no reason why I should be frightened at the death of 
the Governor and it was quite reasonable that as Commandant of the Cas- 
tle I should be frightened at the sight of the warship. The analysis showed, 
however, that Herr P. was only a substitute for my own self. (In the dream 
/ was the substitute for him.) I was the Governor who suddenly died. The 
dream-thoughts dealt with the future of my family after my premature 
death. This was the only distressing one among the dream-thoughts; and 
it must have been from it that the fright was detached and brought into 
connection in the dream with the sight of the warship. On the other hand, 
the analysis showed that the region of the dream-thoughts from which the 
warship was taken was filled with the most cheerful recollections. It was a 
year earlier, in Venice, and we were standing one magically beautiful day at 
the windows of our room on the Riva degli Schiavoni and were looking 
across the blue lagoon on which that day there was more movement than 
usual. English ships were expected and were to be given a ceremonial re- 
ception. Suddenly my wife cried out gaily as a child: Here comes the English 
ivarship!’ In the dream I was frightened at these same words. (We see once 
again that speeches in a dream are derived from speeches in real life [cf. pp. 
427 ft.]; I shall show shortly that the element ‘English’ in my wife’s excla- 
mation did not elude the dream-work either.) Here, then, in the process of 
changing the dream-thoughts into the manifest dream-content, I have 
transformed cheerfulness into fear, and 1 need only hint that this trans- 
formation was itself giving expression to a portion of the latent dream- 
content. This example proves, however, that the dream-work is at liberty to 


1 [This trip was described at length by Freud in a letter to Fliess of April 14, 1 898 
(Freud, 1950(7, Letter 88). Aquileia, a few miles inland, is connected by a small 
canal with the lagoon, on one of whose islands Grado is situated. These places, 
at the northern end of the Adriatic, formed part of Austria before 1918.] 




472 


VI. The Dream-Work 


detach an affect from its connections in the dream-thoughts and introduce 
it at any other point it chooses in the manifest dream. 

I take this opportunity of making a somewhat detailed analysis of the 
‘breakfast-ship,’ the appearance of which in the dream brought such a 
nonsensical conclusion to a situation which had up to then been kept at 
a rational level. When subsequently I called the dream-object more pre- 
cisely to mind, it struck me that it was black and that, owing to the fact 
that it was cut off short where it was broadest in the middle, it bore a 
great resemblance at that end to a class of objects which had attracted our 
interest in the museums in the Etruscan towns. These were rectangular 
trays of black pottery, with two handles, on which there stood things like 
coffee- or tea-cups, not altogether unlike one of our modern breakfast-sets. 
In response to our enquiries we learned that this was the ‘toilette’ [toilet- 
set] of an Etruscan lady, with receptacles for cosmetics and powder on it, 
and we had jokingly remarked that it would be a good idea to take one 
home with us for the lady of the house. The object in the dream meant, 
accordingly, a black ‘toilette,’ i.e. mourning dress, and made a direct ref- 
erence to a death. The other end of the dream-object reminded me of the 
funeral boats 1 in which in early times dead bodies were placed and com- 
mitted to the sea for burial. This led on to the point which explained why 
the ships returned in the dream: 

Still, auf gerettetem Boot, treibt in den Hafen der Greis . 2 

It was the return after a shipwreck [ ‘Schiffbruch , 'literally ‘ship-break’] — the 
breakfast-ship was broken off short in the middle. But what was the origin 
of the name ‘breakfast’-ship? It was here that the word ‘English’ came in, 
which was left over from the warships. The English word ‘breakfast’ means 
‘breaking fast.’ The ‘breaking’ related once more to the shipwreck [‘ship- 
break’] and the fasting was connected with the black dress or toilette. 

But it was only the name of the breakfast-ship that was newly con- 
structed by the dream. The thing had existed and reminded me of one of 


1 ‘Nachen’ [in German], a word which is derived, as a philological friend tells me, 
from the root Vf/ng’ [corpse]. 

2 [Safe on his ship, the old man quietly sails into port. 

(Part of an allegory of life and death.) 

Schiller, Nachtrdge zu den Xenien, 

‘Erwartung und Erfullung.’] 




H. Affects in Dreams 


473 


the most enjoyable parts of my last trip. Mistrusting the food that would 
be provided at Aquileia, we had brought provisions with us from Gorizia 
and had bought a bottle of excellent Istrian wine at Aquileia. And while 
the little mail steamer made its way slowly through the ‘ Canale delle Mee ’ 
across the empty lagoon to Grado we, who were the only passengers, ate 
our breakfast on deck in the highest spirits, and we had rarely tasted a 
better one. This, then, was the ‘breakfast-ship,’ and it was precisely be- 
hind this memory of the most cheerful joie de vivre that the dream con- 
cealed the gloomiest thoughts of an unknown and uncanny future. 1 

The detachment of affects from the ideational material which generated 
them is the most striking thing which occurs to them during the formation 
of dreams; but it is neither the only nor the most essential alteration under- 
gone by them on their path from the dream-thoughts to the manifest dream. 
If we compare the affects of the dream-thoughts with those in the dream, one 
thing at once becomes clear. Whenever there is an affect in the dream, it is 
also to be found in the dream- thoughts. But the reverse is not true. A dream 
is in general poorer in affect than the psychical material from the manipu- 
lation of which it has proceeded. When I have reconstructed the dream- 
thoughts, 1 habitually find the most intense psychical impulses in them 
striving to make themselves felt and struggling as a rule against others that are 
sharply opposed to them. If I then turn back to the dream, it not infrequendy 
appears colourless, and without emotional tone of any great intensity. The 
dream-work has reduced to a level of indifference not only the content but 
often the emotional tone of my thoughts as well. It might be said that the 
dream-work brings about a suppression of affects. Let us, for instance, take the 
dream of the botanical monograph [pp. 193 ff.]. The thoughts corresponding 
to it consisted of a passionately agitated plea on behalf of my liberty to act as 
I chose to act and to govern my life as seemed right to me and me alone. The 
dream that arose from them has an indifferent ring about it: ‘I had written a 
monograph; it lay before me; it contained coloured plates; dried plants ac- 
companied each copy.’ This reminds one of the peace that has descended 
upon a batdefield strewn with corpses; no trace is left of the struggle which 
raged over it. 

Things can be otherwise: lively manifestations of affect can make their 
way into the dream itself. For the moment, however, I will dwell upon the 


1 [This dream is mentioned again on p. 548.] 




474 


VI. The Dream-Work 


incontestable fact that large numbers of dreams appear to be indifferent, 
whereas it is never possible to enter into the dream-thoughts without be- 
ing deeply moved. 

No complete theoretical explanation can here be given of this suppres- 
sion of affect in the course of the dream-work. It would require to be pre- 
ceded by a most painstaking investigation of the theory of affects and of 
the mechanism of repression. [Cf. pp. 600 ff] I will only permit myself a 
reference to two points. I am compelled — for other reasons — to picture 
the release of affects as a centrifugal process directed towards the interior 
of the body and analogous to the processes of motor and secretory inner- 
vation. 1 Now just as in the state of sleep the sending out of motor impulses 
towards the external world appears to be suspended, so it may be that the 
centrifugal calling-up of affects by unconscious thinking may become 
more difficult during sleep. In that case the affective impulses occurring 
during the course of the dream-thoughts would from their very nature be 
weak impulses, and consequently those which found their way into the 
dream would be no less weak. On this view, then, the ‘suppression of af- 
fect ’ would not in any way be the consequence of the dream-work but 
would result from the state of sleep. This may be true, but it cannot be the 
whole truth. We must also bear in mind that any relatively complex dream 
turns out to be a compromise produced by a conflict between psychical 
forces. For one thing, the thoughts constructing the wish are obliged to 
struggle against the opposition of a censoring agency; and for another 
thing, we have often seen that in unconscious thinking itself every train of 
thought is yoked with its contradictory opposite. Since all of these trains 
of thought are capable of carrying an affect, we shall by and large scarcely 
be wrong if we regard the suppression of affect as a consequence of the in- 
hibition which these contraries exercise upon each other and which the 
censorship exercises upon the impulsions suppressed by it. The inhibition 
of affect, accordingly, must be considered as the second consequence of the cen- 
sorship of dreams, just as dream-distortion is its first consequence. 


1 [The release of affects is described as ‘centrifugal’ (though directed towards the 
interior of the body) from the point of view of the mental apparatus. The theory 
of the release of affects implicit in this passage is explained at some length in Sec- 
tion 12 (‘The Experience of Pain’) of Part I of Freud’s ‘Project for a Scientific 
Psychology’ (in Freud, 1950a). See also p. 580 below. — For Freud’s use of the 
term ‘innervation’ see footnote, p. 539.] 




H. Affects in Dreams 


475 


I will here give as an instance a dream in which the indifferent feeling- 
tone of the content of the dream can be explained by the antithesis be- 
tween the dream-thoughts. It is a short dream, which will fill every reader 
with disgust. 


IV 

A hill, on which there was something like an open-air closet: a very long 
seat with a large hole at the end of it. Its back edge was thickly covered with 
small heaps of faeces of all sizes and degrees of freshness. There were bushes be- 
hind the seat. I micturated on the seat; a long stream of urine washed every- 
thing clean; the lumps of faeces came away easily and fell into the opening. It 
was as though at the end there was still some left. 

Why did 1 feel no disgust during this dream? 

Because, as the analysis showed, the most agreeable and satisfying 
thoughts contributed to bringing the dream about. What at once occurred 
to me in the analysis were the Augean stables which were cleansed by Her- 
cules. This Hercules was I. The hill and bushes came from Aussee, where 
my children were stopping at the time. 1 had discovered the infantile aeti- 
ology of the neuroses and had thus saved my own children from falling ill. 
The seat (except, of course, for the hole) was an exact copy of a piece of 
furniture which had been given to me as a present by a grateful woman 
patient. It thus reminded me of how much my patients honoured me. In- 
deed, even the museum of human excrement could be given an interpre- 
tation to rejoice my heart. However much I might be disgusted by it in 
reality, in the dream it was a reminiscence of the fair land of Italy where, 
as we all know, the W.C.s in the small towns are furnished in precisely this 
way. The stream of urine which washed everything clean was an unmis- 
takable sign of greatness. It was in that way that Gulliver extinguished the 
great fire in Lilliput — though incidentally this brought him into disfavour 
with its tiny queen. But Gargantua, too, Rabelais’ superman, revenged 
himself in the same way on the Parisians by sitting astride on Notre Dame 
and turning his stream of urine upon the city. It was only on the previous 
evening before going to sleep that I had been turning over Garnier’s illus- 
trations to Rabelais. And, strangely enough, here was another piece of ev- 
idence that I was the superman. The platform of Notre Dame was my 
favourite resort in Paris; every free afternoon I used to clamber about there 



476 


VI. The Dream-Work 


on the towers of the church between the monsters and the devils. The fact 
that all the faeces disappeared so quickly under the stream recalled the 
motto: Ajflavit et dissipati sunt, ’ which I intended one day to put at the 
head of a chapter upon the therapy of hysteria. 1 

And now for the true exciting cause of the dream. It had been a hot 
summer afternoon; and during the evening I had delivered my lecture on 
the connection between hysteria and the perversions, and everything I 
had had to say displeased me intensely and seemed to me completely de- 
void of any value. I was tired and felt no trace of enjoyment in my diffi- 
cult work; I longed to be away from all this grubbing about in human 
dirt and to be able to join my children and afterwards visit the beauties 
of Italy. In this mood I went from the lecture room to a cafe, where I had 
a modest snack in the open air, since I had no appetite for food. One of 
my audience, however, went with me and he begged leave to sit by me 
while 1 drank my coffee and choked over my cresent roll. He began to 
flatter me: telling me how much he had learnt from me, how he looked 
at, everything now with fresh eyes, how I had cleansed the Augean stables 
of errors and prejudices in my theory of the neuroses. He told me, in 
short, that I was a very great man. My mood fitted ill with this paean of 
praise; I fought against my feeling of disgust, went home early to escape 
from him, and before going to sleep turned over the pages of Rabelais and 
read one of Conrad Ferdinand Meyer’s short stories, ‘Die Leiden eines 
Knaben’ [‘A Boy’s Sorrows’]. 

Such was the material out of which the dream emerged. Meyer’s short 
story brought up in addition a recollection of scenes from my childhood. 
(Cf. the last episode in the dream about Count Thun [pp. 235 £].) The 
daytime mood of revulsion and disgust persisted into the dream in so far 
as it was able to provide almost the entire material of its manifest content. 
But during the night a contrary mood of powerful and even exaggerated 
self- assertiveness arose and displaced the former one. The content of the 
dream had to find a form which would enable it to express both the delu- 
sions of inferiority and the megalomania in the same material. The com- 
promise between them produced an ambiguous dream-content; but it 
also resulted in an indifferent feeling-tone owing to the mutual inhibition 
of these contrary impulses. 


'[. Footnote in 1925 edition only:] For a correction of this quotation see above, 
p. 235 n. 2. 




H. Affects in Dreams 


477 


According to the theory of wish-fulfilment, this dream would not have 
become possible if the antithetical megalomanie train of thought (which, 
it is true, was suppressed, but had a pleasurable tone) had not emerged in 
addition to the feeling of disgust. For what is distressing may not be rep- 
resented in a dream; nothing in our dream-thoughts which is distressing 
can force an entry into a dream unless it at the same time lends a disguise 
to the fulfilment of a wish. [Cf. pp. 557 f] 

There is yet another alternative way in which the dream-work can deal 
with affects in the dream-thoughts, in addition to allowing them through 
or reducing them to nothing. It can turn them into their opposite. We have 
already become acquainted with the interpretative rule according to which 
every element in a dream can, for purposes of interpretation, stand for its 
opposite just as easily as for itself. [See p. 334.] We can never tell before- 
hand whether it stands for the one or for the other; only the context can 
decide. A suspicion of this truth has evidently found its way into popular 
consciousness: ‘dream-books’ very often adopt the principle of contraries 
in their interpretation of dreams. This turning of a thing into its opposite 
is made possible by the intimate associative chain which links the idea of 
a thing with its opposite in our thoughts. Like any other kind of displace- 
ment it can serve the ends of the censorship; but it is also frequently a 
product of wish-fulfilment, for wish-fulfilment consists in nothing else 
than a replacement of a disagreeable thing by its opposite. Just as ideas of 
things can make their appearance in dreams turned into their opposite, 
so too can the affects attaching to dream-thoughts; and it seems likely that 
this reversal of affect is brought about as a rule by the dream-censorship. 
In social life, which has provided us with our familiar analogy with the 
dream-censorship, we also make use of the suppression and reversal of 
affect, principally for purposes of dissimulation. If I am talking to some- 
one whom I am obliged to treat with consideration while wishing to say 
something hostile to him, it is almost more important that I should con- 
ceal any expression of my affect from him than that I should mitigate the 
verbal form of my thoughts. If I were to address him in words that were 
not impolite, but accompanied them with a look or gesture of hatred and 
contempt, the effect which 1 should produce on him would not be very 
different from what it would have been if I had thrown my contempt 
openly in his face. Accordingly, the censorship bids me above all suppress 
my affects; and, if I am a master of dissimulation, I shall assume the 



478 


VI. The Dream-Work 


opposite affect — smile when I am angry and seem affectionate when I wish 
to destroy. 

We have already come across an excellent example of a reversal of affect 
of this kind carried out in a dream on behalf of the dream-censorship. In 
the dream of ‘my uncle with the yellow beard’ [pp. 163 ff.] I felt the great- 
est affection for my friend R., whereas and because the dream-thoughts 
called him a simpleton. It was from this example of reversal of affect that 
we derived our first hint of the existence of a dream-censorship. Nor is it 
necessary to assume, in such cases either, that the dream-work creates con- 
trary affects of this kind out of nothing; it finds them as a rule lying ready 
to hand in the material of the dream-thoughts, and merely intensifies 
them with the psychical force arising from a motive of defence, till they 
can predominate for the purposes of dream-formation. In the dream of my 
uncle which I have just mentioned, the antithetical, affectionate affect 
probably arose from an infantile source (as was suggested by the later part 
of the dream), for the uncle-nephew relationship, owing to the peculiar 
nature of the earliest experiences of my childhood (cf. the analysis on pp. 
433 f. [and below, pp. 488]) had become the source of all my friendships 
and all my hatreds. 

An excellent example of a reversal of affect of this kind 1 will be found 
in a dream recorded by Ferenczi (1916): ‘An elderly gentleman was awak- 
ened one night by his wife, who had become alarmed because he was 
laughing so loudly and unrestrainedly in his sleep. Subsequently the man 
reported that he had had the following dream: I was lying in bed and a 
gentleman who was knoivn to me entered the room; I tried to turn on the 
light but was unable to: I tried over and over again, but in vain. Thereupon 
my wife got out of bed to help me, but she could not manage it either. But as 
she felt awkward in front of the gentleman owing to being ‘en neglige, ’she fi- 
nally gave it up and went back to bed. All of this was so funny that I couldn ’t 
help roaring ivith laughter at it. My ivife said, ‘Why are you laughing ? why 
are you laughing. ?’ but I only went on laughing till I ivoke up. — Next day the 
gentleman was very depressed and had a headache: so much laughing had 
upset him, he thought. 

‘The dream seems less amusing when it is considered analytically. The 
“gentleman known to him” who entered the room was, in the latent dream- 
thoughts, the picture of Death as the “great Unknown” — a picture which 
had been called up in his mind during the previous day. The old gentleman, 


1 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1919.] 




H. Affects in Dreams 


479 


who suffered from arterio-sclerosis, had had good reason the day before for 
thinking of dying. The unrestrained laughter took the place of sobbing and 
weeping at the idea that he must die. It was the light of life that he could no 
longer turn on. This gloomy thought may have been connected with at- 
tempts at copulation which he had made shordy before but which had failed 
even with the help of his wife en neglige. He realized that he was already go- 
ing down hill. The dream-work succeeded in transforming the gloomy idea 
of impotence and death into a comic scene, and his sobs into laughter.’ 

There is one class of dreams which have a particular claim to be 
described as ‘hypocritical’ and which offer a hard test to the theory of 
wish-fulfilment . 1 My attention was drawn to them when Frau Dr. M. 
Hilferding brought up the following record of a dream of Peter Rosegger’s 
for discussion by the Vienna Psycho-Analytical Society. 

Rosegger writes in his story ‘Fremd gemacht!’ 2 ‘As a rule I am a sound 
sleeper but many a night I have lost my rest — for, along with my modest 
career as a student and man of letters, I have for many years dragged around 
with me, like a ghost from which I could not set myself free, the shadow of 
a tailor’s life. 

‘It is not as though in the daytime I had reflected very often or very in- 
tensely on my past. One who had cast off the skin of a Philistine and was 
seeking to conquer Earth and Heaven had other things to do. Nor would 
I, when I was a dashing young fellow, have given more than a thought to 
my nightly dreams. Only later, when the habit had come to me of reflect- 
ing upon everything, or when the Philistine within me began to stir a tri- 
fle, did I ask myself why it should be that, if I dreamt at all, I was always a 
journeyman tailor and that I spent so long a time as such with my master 
and worked without pay in his workshop. I knew well enough, as I sat like 
that beside him, sewing and ironing, that my right place was no longer 
there and that as a townsman I had other things to occupy me. But I was 
always on vacation, I was always having holidays, and so it was that I sat 
beside my master as his assistant. It often irked me and I felt sad at the loss 
of time in which I might well have found better and more useful things to 
do. Now and then, when something went awry, I had to put up with a 


1 [This paragraph and the following quotation from Rosegger, together with the 
discussion of it, were added in 1911. Rosegger (1843-1918) was a well-known 
Austrian writer who reached celebrity from very humble, peasant beginnings.] 

2 [‘Dismissed!’] In the second volume of Waldheimat, p. 303. 




480 


VI. The Dream-Work 


scolding from my master, though there was never any talk of wages. Often, 
as I sat there with bent back in the dark workshop, I thought of giving no- 
tice and taking my leave. Once I even did so; but my master paid no heed 
and I was soon sitting beside him again and sewing. 

‘After such tedious hours, what a joy it was to wake! And I determined 
that if this persistent dream should come again I would throw it from me 
with energy and call aloud: “This is mere hocus-pocus, I am lying in bed 
and want to sleep. ...” But next night I was once more sitting in the tai- 
lor’s workshop. 

‘And so it went on for years with uncanny regularity. Now it happened 
once that my master and I were working at Alphelhofer’s (the peasant in 
whose house I had worked when I was first apprenticed) and my master 
showed himself quite especially dissatisfied with my work. “I’d like to 
know where you’re wool-gathering,” he said, and looked at me darkly. The 
most reasonable thing to do, I thought, would be to stand up and tell him 
that I was only with him to please him and then go off. But I did not do 
so. I made no objection when my master took on an apprentice and or- 
dered me to make room for him on the bench. I moved into the corner 
and sewed. The same day another journeyman was taken on as well, a 
canting hypocrite — he was a Bohemian — who had worked at our place 
nineteen years before, and had fallen into the brook once on his way back 
from the inn. When he looked for a seat there was no more room. 1 turned 
to my master questioningly, and he said to me: “You’ve no gift for tailor- 
ing, you can go! you’re dismissed!” My fright at this was so overpowering 
that I awoke. 

‘The grey light of morning was glimmering through the uncurtained 
windows into my familiar home. Works of art surrounded me; there in my 
handsome bookcase stood the eternal Homer, the gigantic Dante, the in- 
comparable Shakespeare, the glorious Goethe — all the magnificent immor- 
tals. From the next room rang out the clear young voices of the awakening 
children joking with their mother. 1 felt as though I had found afresh this 
idyllically sweet, this peaceful, poetic, spiritual life in which I had so often 
and so deeply felt a meditative human happiness. Yet it vexed me that I had 
not been beforehand with my master in giving him notice, but had been 
dismissed by him. 

‘And how astonished I was! From the night on which my master dis- 
missed me, I enjoyed peace; I dreamt no more of the tailoring days which 
lay so far back in my past — days which had been so cheerfully unassum- 
ing but had thrown such a long shadow over my later years.’ 



H. Affects in Dreams 


481 


In this series of dreams dreamt by an author who had been a journey- 
man tailor in his youth, it is hard to recognize the dominance of wish- 
fulfilment. All the dreamer’s enjoyment lay in his daytime existence, 
whereas in his dreams he was still haunted by the shadow of an unhappy 
life from which he had at last escaped. Some dreams of my own of a simi- 
lar kind have enabled me to throw a little light on the subject. As a young 
doctor I worked for a long time at the Chemical Institute without ever be- 
coming proficient in the skills which that science demands; and for that 
reason in my waking life I have never liked thinking of this barren and in- 
deed humiliating episode in my apprenticeship. On the other hand I have 
a regularly recurring dream of working in the laboratory, of carrying out 
analyses and of having various experiences there. These dreams are dis- 
agreeable in the same way as examinations dreams and they are never very 
distinct. While I was interpreting one of them, my attention was eventu- 
ally attracted by the word ‘analysis,’ which gave me a key to their under- 
standing. Since those days I have become an ‘analyst,’ and I now carry out 
analyses which are very highly spoken of, though it is true that they are 
‘psycho-analyses. 'It was now clear to me: if I have grown proud of carrying 
out analyses of that kind in my daytime life and feel inclined to boast to 
myself of how successful I have become, my dreams remind me during the 
night of those other, unsuccessful analyses of which I have no reason to feel 
proud. They are the punishment dreams of a parvenu, like the dreams of 
the journeyman tailor who had grown into a famous author. But how does 
it become possible for a dream, in the conflict between a parvenu’s pride 
and his self-criticism, to side with the latter, and choose as its content a 
sensible warning instead of an unlawful wish-fulfilment? As I have already 
said, the answer to this question raises difficulties. We may conclude that 
the foundation of the dream was formed in the first instance by an exag- 
geratedly ambitious phantasy, but that humiliating thoughts that poured 
cold water on the phantasy found their way into the dream instead. It may 
be remembered that there are masochistic impulses in the mind, which 
may be responsible for a reversal such as this. I should have no objection 
to this class of dreams being distinguished from ‘wish-fulfilment dreams’ 
under the name of ‘punishment dreams.’ I should not regard this as im- 
plying any qualification of the theory of dreams which I have hitherto put 
forward; it would be no more than a linguistic expedient for meeting the 
difficulties of those who find it strange that opposites should converge . 1 


1 [The last two sentences were added in 1919.] 




482 


VI. The Dream-Work 


But a closer examination of some of these dreams brings something more 
to light. In an indistinct part of the background of one of my laboratory 
dreams I was of an age which placed me precisely in the gloomiest and 
most unsuccessful year of my medical career. I was still without a post and 
had no idea how I could earn my living; but at the same time I suddenly 
discovered that I had a choice open to me between several women whom 
I might marry! So 1 was once more young, and, more than everything, she 
was once more young — the woman who had shared all these difficult years 
with me. The unconscious instigator of the dream was thus revealed as one 
of the constantly gnawing wishes of a man who is growing older. The con- 
flict raging in other levels of the mind between vanity and self-criticism 
had, it is true, determined the content of the dream; but it was only the 
more deeply-rooted wish for youth that had made it possible for that con- 
flict to appear as a dream. Even when we are awake we sometimes say to 
ourselves: Things are going very well today and times were hard in the old 
days; all the same, it was lovely then — I was still young.’ 1 

Another group of dreams, 2 which I have often come across in myself 
and recognized as hypocritical, have as their content a reconciliation with 
people with whom friendly relations have long since ceased. In such cases 
analysis habitually reveals some occasion which might urge me to aban- 
don the last remnant of consideration for these former friends and to treat 
them as strangers or enemies. The dream, however, prefers to depict the 
opposite relationship. [Cf. p. 169 «.] 

In forming any judgement upon dreams recorded by an imaginative 
writer it is reasonable to suppose that he may have omitted from his ac- 
count details in the content of the dream which he regards as unessential 
or distracting. His dreams will in that case raise problems which would 
be quickly solved if their content were reported in full. 


1 [ Footnote added 1930:] Since psycho-analysis has divided the personality into an 
ego and super-ego (Freud, 1921c [and 1923^]), it has become easy to recognize 
in these punishment dreams fulfillments of the wishes of the super-ego. [See be- 
low, pp. 557 ff. — The Rosegger dreams are also discussed in Section IX of Freud, 
1923c.] 

1 [This paragraph was added in 1919, and seems to have been wrongly interpo- 
lated at this point. It should probably have come after the two next paragraphs. 
These date from 1911, like the preceding Rosegger discussion, to which they are 
clearly related. What follows them goes back once more to 1900. — Some further 
remarks on hypocritical dreams will be found near the end of Section III of 
Freud’s paper on a case of female homosexuality (1920a.)] 



H. Affects in Dreams 


483 


Otto Rank has pointed out to me that the Grimms’ fairy tale of ‘The 
Little Tailor, or Seven at a Blow’ contains an exactly similar dream of a par- 
venu. The tailor, who has become a hero and the son-in-law of the King, 
dreams one night of his former handicraft, as he lies beside his wife, the 
Princess. She, becoming suspicious, posts armed guards the next night to 
listen to the dreamer’s words and to arrest him. But the little tailor is 
warned, and sees to it that his dream is corrected. 

The complicated process of elimination, diminution and reversal, by 
means of which the affects in the dream-thoughts are eventually turned 
into those in the dream, can be satisfactorily followed in suitable syntheses 
of dreams that have been completely analysed. 1 will quote a few more ex- 
amples of affects in dreams where some of the possibilities I have enumer- 
ated will be found realized. 


v 

If we turn back to the dream about the strange task set me by old 
Briicke of making a dissection of my own pelvis [p. 459 £], it will be re- 
called that in the dream itself I missed the gruesome feeling [‘ Grauen ’] ap- 
propriate to it. Now this was a wish-fulfilment in more than one sense. 
The dissection meant the self-analysis which I was carrying out, as it were, 
in the publication of this present book about dreams — a process which 
had been so distressing to me in reality that I had postponed the printing 
of the finished manuscript for more than a year. A wish then arose that I 
might get over this feeling of distaste; hence it was that I had no gruesome 
feeling [‘Grauen’] in the dream. But I should also have been very glad to 
miss growing grey — ‘Grauen’ in the other sense of the word. I was already 
growing quite grey, and the grey of my hair was another reminder that I 
must not delay any longer. And, as we have seen, the thought that I should 
have to leave it to my children to reach the goal of my difficult journey 
forced its way through to representation at the end of the dream. 

Let us next consider the two dreams in which an expression of satisfac- 
tion was transposed to the moment after waking. In the one case the rea- 
son given for the satisfaction was an expectation that I should now 
discover what was meant by ‘I’ve dreamt of that before,’ while the satisfac- 
tion really referred to the birth of my first children [pp. 454 £]. In the 



484 


VI. The Dream-Work 


other case the ostensible reason was my conviction that something that 
had been ‘prognosticated’ was now coming true, while the real reference 
was similar to that in the former dream: it was the satisfaction with which 
I greeted the birth of my second son [pp. 455 £] Here the affects which 
dominated the dream-thoughts persisted in the dreams; but it is safe to say 
that in no dream can things be as simple as all that. If we go a little more 
deeply into the two analyses we find that this satisfaction which had es- 
caped censorship had received an accession from another source. This 
other source had grounds for fearing the censorship, and its affect would 
undoubtedly have aroused opposition if it had not covered itself by the 
similar, legitimate affect of satisfaction, arising from the permissible 
source, and slipped in, as it were, under its wing. 

Unfortunately, I cannot demonstrate this in the actual case of these 
dreams, but an instance taken from another department of life will make 
my meaning clear. Let us suppose the following case. There is a person of 
my acquaintance whom I hate, so that I have a lively inclination to feel 
glad if anything goes wrong with him. But the moral side of my nature will 
not give way to this impulse. 1 do not dare to express a wish that he should 
be unlucky, and if he meets with some undeserved misfortune, I suppress 
my satisfaction at it and force myself to manifestations and thoughts of re- 
gret. Everyone must have found himself in this situation at some time or 
other. What now happens, however, is that the hated person, by a piece of 
misconduct of his own, involves himself in some well-deserved unpleasant- 
ness; when that happens, I may give free rein to my satisfaction that he has 
met with a just punishment and in this I find myself in agreement with 
many other people who are impartial. I may observe, however, that my sat- 
isfaction seems more intense than that of these other people; it has received 
an accession from the source of my hatred, which till then has been pre- 
vented from producing its affect, but in the altered circumstances is no 
longer hindered from doing so. In social life this occurs in general wherever 
antipathetic people or members of an unpopular minority put themselves 
in the wrong. Their punishment does not as a rule correspond to their 
wrong-doing but to their wrong-doing plus the ill-feeling directed against 
them which has previously been without any consequences. It is no doubt 
true that those who inflict the punishment are committing an injustice in 
this; but they are prevented from perceiving it by the satisfaction resulting 
from the removal of a suppression which has long been maintained within 
them. In cases such as this the affect is justified in its quality but not in its 
amount; and self-criticism which is set at rest on the one point is only too 



H. Affects in Dreams 


485 


apt to neglect examination of the second one. When once a door has been 
opened, it is easy for more people to push their way through it than there 
had originally been any intention of letting in. 

A striking feature in neurotic characters — the fact that a cause capable 
of releasing an affect is apt to produce in them a result which is qualita- 
tively justified but quantitatively excessive — is to be explained along these 
same lines, in so far as it admits of any psychological explanation at all. 
The excess arises from sources of affect which had previously remained un- 
conscious and suppressed. These sources have succeeded in setting up an 
associative link with the real releasing cause, and the desired path from the 
release of their own affect has been opened by the other source of affect, 
which is unobjectionable and legitimate. Our attention is thus drawn to 
the fact that in considering the suppressed and suppressing agencies, we 
must not regard their relation as being exclusively one of mutual inhibi- 
tion. Just as much regard must be paid to cases in which the two agencies 
bring about a pathological effect by working side by side and by intensify- 
ing each other. 

Let us now apply these hints upon psychical mechanisms to an under- 
standing of the expressions of affect in dreams. A satisfaction which is ex- 
hibited in a dream and can, of course, be immediately referred to its proper 
place in the dream-thoughts is not always completely elucidated by this ref- 
erence alone. It is as a rule necessary to look for another source of it in the 
dream-thoughts, a source which is under the pressure of the censorship. As 
a result of that pressure, this source would normally have produced, not sat- 
isfaction, but the contrary affect. Owing to the presence of the first source 
of affect, however, the second source is enabled to withdraw its affect of sat- 
isfaction from repression and allow it to act as an intensification of the sat- 
isfaction from the first source. Thus it appears that affects in dreams are fed 
from a confluence of several sources and are overdetermined in their refer- 
ence to the material of the dream-thoughts. During the dream-work, sources 
of affect which are capable of producing the same affect come together in gener- 
ating it . 1 

We can gain a little insight into these complications from the analysis 
of that fine specimen of a dream of which the words ‘ Non vixii formed 


1 [ Footriote added 1909:] I have given an analogous explanation of the extraordi- 
narily powerful pleasurable effect of tendentious jokes [Freud, 1905c, towards 
the end of Chapter IV.] 




486 


VI. The Dream-Work 


the centre-point. (See pp. 430 ff.) In that dream manifestations of affect 
of various qualities were brought together at two points in its manifest 
content. Hostile and distressing feelings — ‘overcome by strange emo- 
tions’ were the words used in the dream itself — were piled up at the point 
at which I annihilated my opponent and friend with two words. And 
again, at the end of the dream, I was highly delighted, and I went on to 
approve the possibility, which in waking life I knew was absurd, of there 
being revenants who could be eliminated by a mere wish. 

I have not yet related the exciting cause of the dream. It was of great 
importance and led deep into an understanding of the dream. I had heard 
from my friend in Berlin, whom I have referred to as ‘FI.’ [i.e. Fliess], that 
he was about to undergo an operation and that I should get further news 
of his condition from some of his relatives in Vienna. The first reports I 
received after the operation were not reassuring and made me feel anx- 
ious. I should have much preferred to go to him myself, but just at that 
time I was the victim of a painful complaint which made movement of 
any kind a torture to me. The dream-thoughts now informed me that I 
feared for my friend’s life. His only sister, whom I had never known, had, 
as I was aware, died in early youth after a very brief illness. (In the dream 
FI. spoke about his sister and said that in three quarters of an hour she was 
dead.) I must have imagined that his constitution was not much more re- 
sistant than his sister’s and that, after getting some much worse news of 
him, I should make the journey after all — and arrive too late, for which I 
might never cease to reproach myself. 1 This reproach for coming too late 
became the central point of the dream but was represented by a scene in 
which Briicke, the honoured teacher of my student years, levelled this re- 
proach at me with a terrible look from his blue eyes. It will soon appear 
what it was that caused the situation [in regard to FI.] to be switched on 
to these lines. The scene [with Briicke] itself could not be reproduced by 
the dream in the form in which I experienced it. The other figure in the 
dream was allowed to keep the blue eyes, but the annihilating role was al- 
lotted to me — a reversal which was obviously the work of wish-fulfilment. 
My anxiety about my friend’s recovery, my self-reproaches for not going 
to see him, the shame I felt about this — he had come to Vienna (to see 


1 It was this phantasy, forming part of the unconscious dream-thoughts, which so 
insistently demanded ‘ Non vivit ’ instead of ‘Non vixit’: ‘You have come too late, 
he is no longer alive.’ I have already explained on pp. 430-1 that ‘ Non vivit ’ was 
also required by the manifest situation in the dream. 




H. Affects in Dreams 


487 


me) ‘ unobtrusively ’ — the need I felt to consider that I was excused by 
my illness — all of this combined to produce the emotional storm which 
was clearly perceived in my sleep and which raged in this region of the 
dream-thoughts. 

But there was something else in the exciting cause of the dream, which 
had a quite opposite effect upon me. Along with the unfavourable reports 
during the first few days after the operation, I was given a warning not to 
discuss the matter with anyone. I had felt offended by this because it im- 
plied an unnecessary distrust of my discretion. I was quite aware that these 
instructions had not emanated from my friend but were due to tactlessness 
or over- anxiety on the part of the intermediary, but I was very disagreeably 
affected by the veiled reproach because it was — not wholly without justi- 
fication. As we all know, it is only reproaches which have something in 
them that ‘stick’; it is only they that upset us. What I have in mind does 
not relate, it is true, to this friend, but to a much earlier period of my life. 
On that occasion I caused trouble between two friends (both of whom had 
chosen to honour me, too, with that name) by quite unnecessarily telling 
one of them, in the course of conversation, what the other had said about 
him. At that time, too, reproaches had been levelled at me, and they were 
still in my memory. One of the two friends concerned was Professor 
Fleischl; I may describe the other by his first name of ‘Josef’ — which was 
also that of P., my friend and opponent in the dream . 1 

The reproach of being unable to keep anything to myself was attested 
in the dream by the element ‘unobtrusive’ and by Fl.’s question as to how 
much I had told P. about his affairs. But it was the intervention of this 
memory (of my early indiscretion and its consequences) that transported 
the reproach against me for coming too late from the present time to the 
period at which I had worked in Brucke’s laboratory. And, by turning the 


1 [What follows will be made more intelligible by some facts derived from a paper 
by Bernfeld (1944). Freud worked at the Vienna Physiological Institute (‘Brucke’s 
laboratory’) from 1876 to 1882. Ernst Briicke (1819-92) was at its head; his two 
assistants in Freud’s time were Sigmund Exner (1846-1925) and Ernst Fleischl 
von Marxow (1846-91), both some ten years older than Freud. Fleischl suffered 
from a very severe physical affliction during the later years of his life, ft was at the 
Physiological Institute that Freud met Josef Breuer (1842-1925), his greatly senior 
collaborator in Studies on Hysteria (1895 d) and the second Josef in the present 
analysis. The first Josef — Freud’s early deceased ‘friend and opponent P.’ — was 
Josef Paneth (1857-90) who succeeded to Freud’s position at the Institute. — See 
also the first volume of Ernest Jones’s Freud biography.] 




488 


VI. The Dream-Work 


second person in the scene of annihilation in the dream into a Josef, I 
made the scene represent not only the reproach against me for coming 
too late but also the far more strongly repressed reproach that I was un- 
able to keep a secret. Here the processes of condensation and displace- 
ment at work in the dream, as well as the reasons for them, are strikingly 
visible. 

My present-day anger, which was only slight, over the warning I had 
been given not to give anything away [about Fl.’s illness] received rein- 
forcements from sources in the depth of my mind and thus swelled into a 
current of hostile feelings against persons of whom I was in reality fond. 
The source of this reinforcement flowed from my childhood. I have already 
shown [pp. 433 £] how my warm friendships as well as my enmities with 
contemporaries went back to my relations in childhood with a nephew 
who was a year my senior; how he was my superior, how I early learned to 
defend myself against him, how we were inseparable friends, and how, ac- 
cording to the testimony of our elders, we sometimes fought with each 
other and — made complaints to them about each other. All my friends 
have in a certain sense been re-incarnations of this first figure who ‘friih 
sich einst dem truben Blick gezeigt’ 1 : they have been revenants. My nephew 
himself re-appeared in my boyhood, and at that time we acted the parts of 
Caesar and Brutus together. My emotional life has always insisted that I 
should have an intimate friend and a hated enemy. I have always been able 
to provide myself afresh with both, and it has not infrequently happened 
that the ideal situation of childhood has been so completely reproduced 
that friend and enemy have come together in a single individual — though 
not, of course, both at once or with constant oscillations, as may have been 
the case in my early childhood. 

1 do not propose at this point to discuss how it is that in such circum- 
stances as these a recent occasion for the generation of an affect can hark 
back to an infantile situation and be replaced by that situation as far as the 
production of affect is concerned. [See p. 547.] This question forms part 
of the psychology of unconscious thinking, and would find its proper 
place in a psychological elucidation of the neuroses. For the purposes of 
dream-interpretation let us assume that a childhood memory arose, or was 
constructed in phantasy, with some such content as the following. The 
two children had a dispute about some object. (What the object was may 


'['••. long since appeared before my troubled gaze’ (Goethe, Faust, Dedication).] 




H. Affects in Dreams 


489 


be left an open question, though the memory or pseudo-memory had a 
quite specific one in view.) Each of them claimed to have got there before 
the other and therefore to have a better right to it. They came to blows and 
might prevailed over right. On the evidence of the dream, I may myself 
have been aware that I was in the wrong (7 myself noticed the mistake ’). 
However, this time I was the stronger and remained in possession of the 
field. The vanquished party hurried to his grandfather — my father — and 
complained about me, and I defended myself in the words which I know 
from my father’s account: ‘I hit him ‘cos he hit me.’ This memory, or 
more probably phantasy, which came into my mind while I was analysing 
the dream — without further evidence I myself could not tell how 1 — 
constituted an intermediate element in the dream-thoughts, which gath- 
ered up the emotions raging in them as a well collects the water that flows 
into it. From this point the dream-thoughts proceeded along some such 
lines as these: ‘It serves you right if you had to make way for me. Why did 
you try to push me out of the way? 1 don’t need you, I can easily find 
someone else to play with,’ and so on. These thoughts now entered upon 
the paths which led to their representation in the dream. There had been 
a time when I had had to reproach my friend Josef [P.J for an attitude of 
this same kind: ‘O te-toi que je my mettel’Yie had followed in my footsteps 
as demonstrator in Briicke’s laboratory, but promotion there was slow and 
tedious. Neither of Briicke’s two assistants was inclined to budge from his 
place, and youth was impatient. My friend, who knew that he could not 
expect to live long, and whom no bonds of intimacy attached to his im- 
mediate superior, sometimes gave loud expression to his impatience, and, 
since this superior [Fleischl] was seriously ill, P.’s wish to have him out of 
the way might have an uglier meaning than the mere hope for the man’s 
promotion. Not unnaturally, a few years earlier, I myself had nourished a 
still livelier wish to fill a vacancy. Wherever there is rank and promotion 
the way lies open for wishes that call for suppression. Shakespeare’s Prince 
Hal could not, even at his father’s sick-bed, resist the temptation of trying 
on the crown. But, as was to be expected, the dream punished my friend, 
and not me, for this callous wish. 2 


1 [This point is discussed below on p. 517.] 

2 It will be noticed that the name Josef plays a great part in my dreams (cf. the 
dream about my uncle [pp. 163 ff.]). My own ego finds it very easy to hide itself 
behind people of that name, since Joseph was the name of a man famous in the 
Bible as an interpreter of dreams. 




490 


VI. The Dream-Work 


‘As he was ambitious, I slew him.’ As he could not wait for the re- 
moval of another man, he was himself removed. These had been my 
thoughts immediately after I attended the unveiling at the University of 
the memorial — not to him but to the other man. Thus a part of the sat- 
isfaction I felt in the dream was to be interpreted: ‘A just punishment! It 
serves you right!’ 

At my friend’s [P.’s] funeral, a young man had made what seemed to 
be an inopportune remark to the effect that the speaker who had deliv- 
ered the funeral oration had implied that without this one man the world 
would come to an end. He was expressing the honest feelings of someone 
whose pain was being interfered with by an exaggeration. But this remark 
of his was the starting-point of the following dream-thoughts: ‘It’s quite 
true that no one’s irreplaceable. How many people I’ve followed to the 
grave already! But I’m still alive. I’ve survived them all; I’m left in posses- 
sion of the field.’ A thought of this kind, occurring to me at a moment at 
which I was afraid I might not find my friend [FI.] alive if I made the 
journey to him, could only be construed as meaning that I was delighted 
because I had once more survived someone, because it was he and not I 
who had died, because I was left in possession of the field, as I had been 
in the phantasied scene from my childhood. This satisfaction, infantile in 
origin, at being in possession of the field constituted the major part of the 
affect that appeared in the dream. I was delighted to survive, and I gave 
expression to my delight with all the naive egoism shown in the anecdote 
of the married couple one of whom said to the other: ‘If one of us dies, I 
shall move to Paris.’ So obvious was it to me that I should not be the one 
to die. 

It cannot be denied that to interpret and report one’s dreams demands 
a high degree of self-discipline. One is bound to emerge as the only villain 
among the crowd of noble characters who share one’s life. Thus it seemed 
to me quite natural that the revenants should only exist for just so long 
as one likes and should be removable at a wish. We have seen what my 
friend Josef was punished for. But the revenants were a series of reincar- 
nations of the friend of my childhood. It was therefore also a source of 
satisfaction to me that I had always been able to find successive substi- 
tutes for that figure; and I felt I should be able to find a substitute for the 
friend whom I was now on the point of losing: no one was irreplaceable. 

But what had become of the dream-censorship? Why had it not raised 
the most energetic objections against this blatantly egoistic train of thought? 



H. Affects in Dreams 


491 


And why had it not transformed the satisfaction attached to that train of 
thought into severe unpleasure? The explanation was, I think, that other, un- 
objectionable trains of thought in connection with the same people found 
simultaneous satisfaction and screened with their affect the affect which 
arose from the forbidden infantile source. In another stratum of my 
thoughts, during the ceremonial unveiling of the memorial, I had reflected 
thus: ‘What a number of valued friends 1 have lost, some through death, 
some through a breach of our friendship! How fortunate that I have found 
a substitute for them and that I have gained one who means more to me 
than ever the others could, and that, at a time of life when new friendships 
cannot easily be formed, I shall never lose his!’ My satisfaction at having 
found a substitute for these lost friends could be allowed to enter the dream 
without interference; but there slipped in, along with it, the hostile satisfac- 
tion derived from the infantile source. It is no doubt true that infantile 
affection served to reinforce my contemporary and justified affection. But 
infantile hatred, too, succeeded in getting itself represented. 

In addition to this, however, the dream contained a clear allusion to 
another train of thought which could legitimately lead to satisfaction. A 
short time before, after long expectation, a daughter had been born to my 
friend [FI.]. I was aware of how deeply he had mourned the sister he had 
so early lost and I wrote and told him I was sure he would transfer the 
love he felt for her on to the child, and that the baby girl would allow him 
at last to forget his irreparable loss. 

Thus this group of thoughts was connected once again with the inter- 
mediate thought in the latent content of the dream [cf. pp. 488-9] from 
which the associative paths diverged in contrary directions: ‘No one is irre- 
placeable!’ ‘There are nothing but revenants: all those we have lost come 
back!’ And now the associative links between the contradictory components 
of the dream-thoughts were drawn closer by the chance fact that my 
friend’s baby daughter had the same name as the little girl I used to play 
with as a child, who was of my age and the sister of my earliest friend and 
opponent. [See p. 434 «.] It gave me great satisfaction when I heard that the 
baby was to be called ‘Pauline.’ And as an allusion to this coincidence, I had 
replaced one Josef by another in the dream and found it impossible to sup- 
press the similarity between the opening letters of the names ‘Fleischl’ and 
‘FL’ From here my thoughts went on to the subject of the names of my own 
children. I had insisted on their names being chosen, not according to the 
fashion of the moment, but in memory of people I have been fond of. 



492 


VI. The Dream-Work 


Their names made the children into revenants. And after all, I reflected, was 
not having children our only path to immortality? 

I have only a few more remarks to add on the subject of affect in 
dreams from another point of view. A dominating element in a sleeper’s 
mind may be constituted by what we call a ‘mood’ — or tendency to some 
affect — and this may then have a determining influence upon his dreams. 
A mood of this kind may arise from his experiences or thoughts during 
the preceding day, or its sources may be somatic. [Cf. pp. 257 fl] In either 
case it will be accompanied by the trains of thought appropriate to it. 
From the point of view of dream-construction it is a matter of indiffer- 
ence whether, as sometimes happens, these ideational contents of the 
dream-thoughts determine the mood in a primary fashion, or whether 
they are themselves aroused secondarily by the dreamer’s emotional dis- 
position which is in its turn to be explained on a somatic basis. In any 
case the construction of dreams is subject to the condition that it can only 
represent something which is the fulfilment of a wish and that it is only 
from wishes that it can derive its psychical motive force. A currently ac- 
tive mood is treated in the same way as a sensation arising and becoming 
currently active during sleep (cf. p. 254 fl), which can be either disre- 
garded or given a fresh interpretation in the sense of a wish-fulfilment. 
Distressing moods during sleep can become the motive force of a dream 
by arousing energetic wishes which the dream is supposed to fulfil. The 
material to which moods are attached is worked over until it can be used 
to express the fulfilment of a wish. The more intense and dominating a 
part is played in the dream-thoughts by the distressing mood, the more 
certain it becomes that the most strongly suppressed wishful impulses will 
make use of the opportunity in order to achieve representation. For, since 
the unpleasure which they would otherwise necessarily produce them- 
selves is already present, they find the harder part of their task — the task 
of forcing their way through to representation — already accomplished for 
them. Here once more we are brought up against the problem of anxiety- 
dreams; and these, as we shall find, form a marginal case in the function 
of dreaming. [Cf. pp. 579 ffl] 



I. Secondary Revision 


493 


(I) 

SECONDARY REVISION 1 

And now at last we can turn to the fourth of the factors concerned in 
the construction of dreams. If we pursue our investigation of the content 
of dreams in the manner in which we have begun it — that is, by compar- 
ing conspicuous events in the dream-content with their sources in the 
dream-thoughts, we shall come upon elements the explanation of which 
calls for an entirely new assumption. What I have in mind are cases in 
which the dreamer is surprised, annoyed or repelled in the dream, and, 
moreover, by a piece of the dream-content itself. As I have shown in a 
number of instances (in the last section), the majority of these critical 
feelings in dreams are not in fact directed against the content of the 
dream, but turn out to be portions of the dream-thoughts which have 
been taken over and used to an appropriate end. But some material of this 
kind does not lend itself to this explanation; its correlate in the material 
of the dream-thoughts is nowhere to be found. What, for instance, is the 
meaning of a critical remark found so often in dreams: ‘This is only a 
dream’? [See p. 353.] Here we have a genuine piece of criticism of the 
dream, such as might be made in waking life. Quite frequently, too, it is 
actually a prelude to waking up; and still more frequently it has been pre- 
ceded by some distressing feeling which is set at rest by the recognition 
that the state is one of dreaming. When the thought ‘this is only a dream’ 
occurs during a dream, it has the same purpose in view as when the words 
are pronounced on the stage by la belle Helene in Offenbach’s comic 
opera of that name: 2 it is aimed at reducing the importance of what has 
just been experienced and at making it possible to tolerate what is to fol- 
low. It serves to lull a particular agency to sleep which would have every 
reason at that moment to bestir itself and forbid the continuance of the 


1 [‘Sekundare Bearbeitung.’ This term has previously been given the somewhat 
misleading English rendering of ‘secondary elaboration.’] 

2 [In the love duet between Paris and Helen in the second act, at the end of which 
they are surprised by Menelaus.] 




494 


VI. The Dream-Work 


dream — or the scene in the opera. It is more comfortable, however, to go 
on sleeping and tolerate the dream, because, after all, ‘it is only a dream.’ 
In my view the contemptuous critical judgement, ‘it’s only a dream,’ ap- 
pears in a dream when the censorship, which is never quite asleep, feels 
that it has been taken unawares by a dream which has already been al- 
lowed through. It is too late to suppress it, and accordingly the censorship 
uses these words to meet the anxiety of the distressing feeling aroused by 
it. The phrase is an example of esprit d’escalier on the part of the psychical 
censorship. 

This instance, however, provides us with convincing evidence that not 
everything contained in a dream is derived from the dream-thoughts, but 
that contributions to its content may be made by a psychical function 
which is indistinguishable from our waking thoughts. The question now 
arises whether this only occurs in exceptional cases, or whether the psy- 
chical agency which otherwise operates only as a censorship plays a habit- 
ual part in the construction of dreams. 

We can have no hesitation in deciding in favour of the second alterna- 
tive. There can be no doubt that the censoring agency, whose influence we 
have so far only recognized in limitations and omissions in the dream- 
content, is also responsible for interpolations and additions in it. The in- 
terpolations are easy to recognize. They are often reported with hesitation, 
and introduced by an ‘as though’; they are not in themselves particularly 
vivid and are always introduced at points at which they can serve as links 
between two portions of the dream-content or to bridge a gap between two 
parts of the dream. They are less easily retained in the memory than gen- 
uine derivatives of the material of the dream-thoughts; if the dream is to be 
forgotten they are the first part of it to disappear, and I have a strong suspi- 
cion that the common complaint of having dreamt a lot, but of having for- 
gotten most of it and of having only retained fragments [p. 297], is based 
upon the rapid disappearance precisely of these connecting thoughts. In a 
complete analysis these interpolations are sometimes betrayed by the fact 
that no material connected with them is to be found in the dream- 
thoughts. But careful examination leads me to regard this as the less fre- 
quent case; as a rule the connecting thoughts lead back nevertheless to 
material in the dream-thoughts, but to material which could have no claim 
to acceptance in the dream either on its own account or owing to its being 
overdetermined. Only in extreme cases, it seems, does the psychical func- 
tion in dream-formation which we are now considering proceed to make 



I. Secondary Revision 


495 


new creations. So long as possible, it employs anything appropriate that it 
can find in the material of the dream-thoughts. 

The thing that distinguishes and at the same time reveals this part of 
the dream-work 1 is its purpose. This function behaves in the manner which 
the poet maliciously ascribes to philosophers: it fills up the gaps in the 
dream-structure with shreds and patches . 2 As a result of its efforts, the 
dream loses its appearance of absurdity and disconnectedness and approx- 
imates to the model of an intelligible experience. But its efforts are not al- 
ways crowned with success. Dreams occur which, at a superficial view, may 
seem faultlessly logical and reasonable; they start from a possible situation, 
carry it on through a chain of consistent modifications and — though far 
less frequently — bring it to a conclusion which causes no surprise. Dreams 
which are of such a kind have been subjected to a far-reaching revision by 
this psychical function that is akin to waking thought; they appear to have 
a meaning, but that meaning is as far removed as possible from their true 
significance. If we analyse them, we can convince ourselves that it is in 
these dreams that the secondary revision has played about with the mate- 
rial the most freely, and has retained the relations present in that material 
to the least extent. They are dreams which might be said to have been al- 
ready interpreted once, before being submitted to waking interpretation . 3 
In other dreams this tendentious revision has only partly succeeded; coher- 
ence seems to rule for a certain distance, but the dream then becomes 
senseless or confused, while perhaps later on in its course it may for a sec- 
ond time present an appearance of rationality. In yet other dreams the re- 
vision has failed altogether; we find ourselves helplessly face to face with a 
meaningless heap of fragmentary material. 

I do not wish to deny categorically that this fourth power in dream- 
construction — which we shall soon recognize as an old acquaintance, since 
in fact it is the only one of the four with which we are familiar in other 
connections — I do not wish to deny that this fourth factor has the capacity 

1 [Elsewhere Freud remarks that, strictly speaking, ‘secondary revision’ is not a 
part of the dream-work. Cf. his article on ‘Psycho-Analysis’ in Marcuse’s Hand- 
worterbuch (Freud, 1923a, end of paragraph on ‘The Interpretation of Dreams.’) 
This same point is also mentioned towards the end of Freud (1913a).] 

2 [An allusion to some lines in Heine’s ‘Die Heimkehr’ (LVIII). The whole pas- 
sage is quoted by Freud near the beginning of the last of his New Introductory 
Lectures (1933a).] 

3 [See, for instance, the dreams recorded on pp. 598 f. and 581.] 




496 


VI. The Dream-Work 


to create new contributions to dreams. It is certain, however, that, like the 
others, it exerts its influence principally by its preferences and selections 
from psychical material in the dream-thoughts that has already been 
formed. Now there is one case in which it is to a great extent spared the 
labour of, as it were, building up a facade for the dream — the case, namely, 
in which a formation of that kind already exists, available for use in the ma- 
terial of the dream-thoughts. I am in the habit of describing the element in 
the dream-thoughts which I have in mind as a ‘phantasy.’ 1 1 shall perhaps 
avoid misunderstanding if I mention the ‘day-dream’ as something analo- 
gous to it in waking life. 2 The part played in our mental life by these struc- 
tures has not yet been fully recognized and elucidated by psychiatrists, 
though M. Benedikt has made what seems to me a very promising start in 
that direction. 3 The importance of day-dreams has not escaped the un- 
erring vision of imaginative writers; there is, for instance, a well-known ac- 
count by Alphonse Daudet in Le Nabab of the day-dreams of one of the 
minor characters in that story. [Cf. p. 536 fl] The study of the psycho- 
neuroses leads to the surprising discovery that these phantasies or day- 
dreams are the immediate fore-runners of hysterical symptoms, or at least of 
a whole number of them. Hysterical symptoms are not attached to actual 
memories, but to phantasies erected on the basis of memories. 4 The frequent 
occurrence of conscious daytime phantasies brings these structures to our 
knowledge; but just as there are phantasies of this kind which are conscious, 
so, too, there are unconscious ones in great numbers, which have to remain 
unconscious on account of their content and of their origin from repressed 
material. Closer investigation of the characteristics of these daytime phan- 
tasies shows us how right it is that these formations should bear the same 
name as we give to the products of our thought during the night — the 


1 [ ‘Phantasie. ’ This German word was earlier used only to mean ‘imagination’; 
Phantasiebildung’ (‘imaginative formation’) would have been used here.] 

1 ‘Reve, ’ ‘petit roman,’ — day-dream,’ ‘ [continuous] story.’ [These last words are in 
English in the original. The term ‘Tagtraum,’ used in the text above, was unfa- 
miliar to German readers and called for elucidation.] 

3 [Freud himself later devoted two papers to the subject of daydreams: 1908a and 
1908f. In 1921 The Psychology of Day-Dreams was published byj. Varendonck, 
to which Freud provided an introduction (Freud, 1921^).] 

4 [This was expressed by Freud more trenchantly in a memorandum accompanying 
his letter to Fliess of May 2, 1897 (Freud, 1950a, Draft L): ‘Phantasies are psy- 
chical facades constructed in order to bar the way to these memories [of primal 
scenes].’] 




I. Secondary Revision 


497 


name, that is, of ‘dreams.’ They share a large number of their properties with 
night-dreams, and their investigation might, in fact, have served as the short- 
est and best approach to an understanding of night-dreams. 

Like dreams, they are wish-fulfillments; like dreams, they are based to 
a great extent on impressions of infantile experiences; like dreams, they 
benefit by a certain degree of relaxation of censorship. If we examine their 
structure, we shall perceive the way in which the wishful purpose that is 
at work in their production has mixed up the material of which they are 
built, has re-arranged it and has formed it into a new whole. They stand 
in much the same relation to the childhood memories from which they 
are derived as do some of the Baroque palaces of Rome to the ancient 
ruins whose pavements and columns have provided the material for the 
more recent structures. 

The function of ‘secondary revision,’ which we have attributed to the 
fourth of the factors concerned in shaping the content of dreams, shows 
us in operation once more the activity which is able to find free vent in 
the creation of day-dreams without being inhibited by any other influ- 
ences. We might put it simply by saying that this fourth factor of ours 
seeks to mould the material offered to it into something like a day-dream. 
If, however, a day-dream of this kind has already been formed within the 
nexus of the dream-thoughts, this fourth factor in the dream-work will 
prefer to take possession of the ready-made day-dream and seek to intro- 
duce it into the content of the dream. There are some dreams which con- 
sist merely in the repetition of a daytime phantasy which may perhaps 
have remained unconscious: 1 such, for instance, as the boy’s dream of 
driving in a war-chariot with the heroes of the Trojan War [p. 154]. In 
my ‘Autodidasker’ dream [pp. 316 f£] the second part at all events was a 
faithful reproduction of a daytime phantasy, innocent in itself, of a con- 
versation with Professor N. In view of the complicated conditions which 
a dream has to satisfy when it comes into existence, it happens more fre- 
quently that the ready-made phantasy forms only a portion of the dream, 
or that only a portion of the phantasy forces its way into the dream. 
Thereafter, the phantasy is treated in general like any other portion of the 
latent material, though it often remains recognizable as an entity in the 
dream. There are often parts of my dreams which stand out as producing 


1 [Cf. the long footnote to the section on ‘The Barrier against Incest’ near the end 
of the third of Freud’s Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905 d). This foot- 
note was added in the Fourth Edition of that book (1920).] 




498 


VI. The Dream-Work 


a different impression from the rest. They strike me as being, as it were, 
more fluent, more connected and at the same time more fleeting than 
other parts of the same dream. These, I know, are unconscious phantasies 
which have found their way into the fabric of the dream, but I have never 
succeeded in pinning down a phantasy of this kind. Apart from this, these 
phantasies, like any other component of the dream-thoughts, are com- 
pressed, condensed, superimposed on one another, and so on. There are, 
however, transitional cases, between the case in which they constitute the 
content (or at least the facade) of the dream unaltered and the extreme 
opposite, in which they are represented in the content of the dream only 
by one of their elements or by a distant allusion. What happens to phan- 
tasies present in the dream-thoughts is evidently also determined by any 
advantages they may have to offer the requirements of the censorship and 
of the urge towards condensation. 

In selecting examples of dream-interpretation I have so far as possible 
avoided dreams in which unconscious phantasies play any considerable 
part, because the introduction of this particular psychical element would 
have necessitated lengthy discussions on the psychology of unconscious 
thinking. Nevertheless, I cannot completely escape a consideration of phan- 
tasies in this connection, since they often make their way complete into 
dreams and since still more often clear glimpses of them can be seen behind 
the dream. I will therefore quote one more dream, which seems to be com- 
posed of two different and opposing phantasies which coincide with each 
other at a few points and of which one is superficial while the second is, as 
it were, an interpretation of the first. [See above p. 49 5]. 1 

The dream — it is the only one of which I possess no careful notes — 
ran roughly as follows. The dreamer, a young unmarried man, was sitting 


1 [ Footnote added 1909:] In my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ 
(1905f [Part II]), I have analysed a good specimen of a dream of this sort, made 
up of a number of superimposed phantasies. Incidentally, I underestimated the 
importance of the part played by these phantasies in the formation of dreams so 
long as I was principally working on my own dreams, which are usually based 
on discussions and conflicts of thought and comparatively rarely on day-dreams. 
In the case of other people it is often much easier to demonstrate the complete 
analogy between night-dreams and day-dreams. With hysterical patients, a hys- 
terical attack can often be replaced by a dream; and it is then easy to convince 
oneself that the immediate forerunner of both these psychical structures was a 
day-dream phantasy. 




I. Secondary Revision 


499 


in the restaurant at which he usually ate and which was presented realis- 
tically in the dream. Several people then appeared, in order to fetch him 
away, and one of them wanted to arrest him. He said to his companions 
at table: ‘I’ll pay later; I’ll come back.’ But they exclaimed with derisive 
smiles: ‘We know all about that; that’s what they all say!’ One of the 
guests called out after him: ‘There goes another one!’ He was then led 
into a narrow room in which he found a female figure carrying a child. 
One of the people accompanying him said: ‘This is Herr Miiller.’ A po- 
lice inspector, or some such official, was turning over a bundle of cards or 
papers and as he did so repeated ‘Miiller, Muller, Miiller.’ Finally he asked 
the dreamer a question, which he answered with an ‘I will.’ He then 
turned round to look at the female figure and observed that she was now 
wearing a big beard. 

Here there is no difficulty in separating the two components. The su- 
perficial one was a phantasy of arrest which appears as though it had been 
freshly constructed by the dream-work. But behind it some material is vis- 
ible which had been only slightly re-shaped by the dream-work: a phantasy 
of marriage. Those features which were common to both phantasies emerge 
with special clarity, in the same way as in one of Gabon’s composite pho- 
tographs. The promise made by the young man (who up till then had been 
a bachelor) that he would come back and join his fellow-diners, at their 
table, the scepticism of his boon-companions (whom experience had taught 
better), the exclamation ‘there goes another one [to get married]’ — all of 
these features fitted in easily with the alternative interpretation. So, too, did 
the ‘I will’ with which he replied to the official’s question. The turning over 
the bundle of papers, with the constant repetition of the same name corre- 
sponded to a less important but recognizable feature of wedding festivities, 
namely the reading out of a bundle of telegrams of congratulation, all of 
them with addresses bearing the same names. The phantasy of marriage ac- 
tually scored a victory over the covering phantasy of arrest in the fact of the 
bride’s making a personal appearance in the dream. I was able to discover 
from an enquiry — the dream was not analysed — why it was that at the end 
of it the bride wore a beard. On the previous day the dreamer had been 
walking in the street with a friend who was as shy of marrying as he was 
himself, and he had drawn his friend’s attention to a darkhaired beauty who 
had passed them. ‘Yes,’ his friend had remarked, ‘if only women like that 
didn’t grow beards like their fathers’ in a few years’ time.’ This dream did 
not, of course, lack elements in which dream-distortion had been carried 
deeper. It may well be, for instance, that the words ‘I’ll pay later’ referred to 



500 


VI. The Dream-Work 


what he feared might be his father-in-law’s attitude on the subject of a 
dowry. In fact, all kinds of qualms were evidently preventing the dreamer 
from throwing himself into the phantasy of marriage with any enjoyment. 
One of these qualms, a fear that marriage might cost him his freedom, was 
embodied in the transformation into a scene of arrest. 

If we return for a moment to the point that the dream-work is glad to 
make use of a ready-made phantasy instead of putting one together out 
of the material of the dream-thoughts, we may perhaps find ourselves in 
a position to solve one of the most interesting puzzles connected with 
dreams. On pp. 58 f. I told the well-known anecdote of how Maury, hav- 
ing been struck in his sleep on the back of his neck by a piece of wood, 
woke up from a long dream which was like a full-length story set in the 
days of the French Revolution. Since the dream, as reported, was a coher- 
ent one and was planned entirely with an eye to providing an explanation 
of the stimulus which woke him and whose occurrence he could not have 
anticipated, the only possible hypothesis seems to be that the whole elab- 
orate dream must have been composed and must have taken place during 
the short period of time between the contact of the board with Maury’s 
cervical vertebrae and his consequent awakening. We should never dare 
to attribute such rapidity to thought-activity in waking life, and we 
should therefore be driven to conclude that the dream-work possesses the 
advantage of accelerating our thought-processes to a remarkable degree. 

Strong objections have been raised to what quickly became a popular 
conclusion by some more recent writers (Le Lorrain, 1894 and 1895, 
Egger, 1895, and others). On the one hand they throw doubts upon the 
accuracy of Maury’s account of his dream; and on the other hand they at- 
tempt to show that the rapidity of the operations of our waking thoughts 
is no less than in this dream when exaggerations have been discounted. 
The discussion raised questions of principle which do not seem to me im- 
mediately soluble. But I must confess that the arguments brought forward 
(by Egger, for instance), particularly against Maury’s guillotine dream, 
leave me unconvinced. I myself would propose the following explanation 
of this dream. Is it so highly improbable that Maury’s dream represents a 
phantasy which had been stored up ready-made in his memory for many 
years and which was aroused — or I would rather say ‘alluded to’ — at the 
moment at which he became aware of the stimulus which woke him? If 
this were so, we should have escaped the whole difficulty of understanding 
how such a long story with all its details could have been composed in the 



I. Secondary Revision 


501 


extremely short period of time which was at the dreamer’s disposal — for 
the story would have been composed already. If the piece of wood had 
struck the back of Maury’s neck while he was awake, there would have 
been an opportunity for some such thought as: ‘That’s just like being guil- 
lotined.’ But since it was in his sleep that he was struck by the board, the 
dream-work made use of the impinging stimulus in order rapidly to pro- 
duce a wish-fulfilment; it was as though it thought (this is to be taken 
purely figuratively) : ‘Here’s a good opportunity of realizing a wishful 
phantasy which was formed at such and such a time in the course of read- 
ing.’ It can hardly be disputed, I think, that the dream-story was precisely 
of a sort likely to be constructed by a young man under the influence of 
powerfully exciting impressions. Who — least of all what Frenchman or 
student of the history of civilization — could fail to be gripped by narra- 
tives of the Reign of Terror, when the men and women of the aristocracy, 
the flower of the nation, showed that they could die with a cheerful mind 
and could retain the liveliness of their wit and the elegance of their man- 
ners till the very moment of the fatal summons? How tempting for a 
young man to plunge into all this in his imagination — to picture himself 
bidding a lady farewell — kissing her hand and mounting the scaffold un- 
afraid! Or, if ambition were the prime motive of the phantasy, how tempt- 
ing for him to take the place of one of those formidable figures who, by 
the power alone of their thoughts and flaming eloquence, ruled the city in 
which the heart of humanity beat convulsively in those days — who were 
led by their convictions to send thousands of men to their death and who 
prepared the way for the transformation of Europe, while all the time their 
own heads were insecure and destined to fall one day beneath the knife of 
the guillotine — how tempting to picture himself as one of the Girondists, 
perhaps, or as the heroic Danton! There is one feature in Maury’s recol- 
lection of the dream, his being ‘led to the place of execution, surrounded 
by an immense mob,’ which seems to suggest that his phantasy was in fact 
of this ambitious type. 

Nor is it necessary that this long-prepared phantasy should have been 
gone through during sleep; it would have been sufficient for it to be merely 
touched on. What I mean is this. If a few bars of music are played and 
someone comments that it is from Mozart’s Figaro (as happens in Don 
Giovanni ) a number of recollections are roused in me all at once, none of 
which can enter my consciousness singly at the first moment. The key- 
phrase serves as a port of entry through which the whole network is simul- 
taneously put in a state of excitation. It may well be the same in the case 



502 


VI. The Dream-Work 


of unconscious thinking. The rousing stimulus excites the psychical port 
of entry which allows access to the whole guillotine phantasy. But the 
phantasy is not gone through during sleep but only in the recollection of 
the sleeper after his awakening. After waking he remembers in all its details 
the phantasy which was stirred up as a whole in his dream. One has no 
means of assuring oneself in such a case that one is really remembering 
something one has dreamt This same explanation — that it is a question of 
ready-made phantasies which are brought into excitation as a whole by the 
rousing stimulus — can be applied to other dreams which are focused upon 
a rousing stimulus, such, for instance, as Napoleon’s battle dream before 
the explosion of the infernal machine [pp. 58 and 252 £]. 

Among the dreams 1 collected by Justine Tobowolska in her disserta- 
tion on the apparent passage of time in dreams, the most informative 
seems to me to be the one reported by Macario (1857, 46) as having been 
dreamt by a dramatic author, Casimir Bonjour. One evening Bonjour 
wanted to attend the first performance of one of his pieces; but he was so 
fatigued that as he was sitting behind the scenes he dozed off just at the 
moment the curtain went up. During his sleep he went through the 
whole five acts of the play, and observed all the various signs of emotion 
shown by the audience during the different scenes. At the end of the per- 
formance he was delighted to hear his name being shouted with the liveli- 
est demonstrations of applause. Suddenly he woke up. He could not 
believe either his eyes or his ears, for the performance had not gone be- 
yond the first few lines of the first scene; he could not have been asleep 
for longer than two minutes. It is surely not too rash to suppose in the 
case of this dream that the dreamer’s going through all five acts of the 
play and observing the attitude of the public to different passages in it 
need not have arisen from any fresh production of material during his 
sleep, but may have reproduced a piece of phantasy-activity (in the sense 
I have described) which had already been completed. Tobowolska, like 
other writers, emphasizes the fact that dreams with an accelerated passage 
of ideas have the common characteristic of seeming specially coherent, 
quite unlike other dreams, and that the recollection of them is summary 
far more than detailed. This would indeed be a characteristic which 
ready-made phantasies of this kind, touched upon by the dream-work, 
would be bound to possess, though this is a conclusion which the writers 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1914 with the exception of the last sentence, 
which appeared in the original edition.] 




I. Secondary Revision 


503 


in question fail to draw. I do not assert, however, that all arousal dreams 
admit of this explanation, or that the problem of the accelerated passage 
of ideas in dreams can be entirely dismissed in this fashion. 

At this point it is impossible to avoid considering the relation between 
this secondary revision of the content of dreams and the remaining factors 
of the dream-work. Are we to suppose that what happens is that in the first 
instance the dream-constructing factors — the tendency towards conden- 
sation, the necessity for evading the censorship, and considerations of rep- 
resentability by the psychical means open to dreams — put together a 
provisional dream-content out of the material provided, and that this con- 
tent is subsequently re-cast so as to conform so far as possible to the de- 
mands of a second agency? This is scarcely probable. We must assume 
rather that from the very first the demands of this second factor constitute 
one of the conditions which the dream must satisfy and that this condi- 
tion, like those laid down by condensation, the censorship imposed by re- 
sistance, and representability, operates simultaneously in a conducive and 
selective sense upon the mass of material present in the dream-thoughts. 
In any case, however, of the four conditions for the formation of dreams, 
the one we have come to know last is the one whose demands appear to 
have the least cogent influence on dreams. 

The following consideration makes it highly probable that the psychi- 
cal function which carries out what we have described as the secondary 
revision of the content of dreams is to be identified with the activity of 
our waking thought. Our waking (preconscious 1 ) thinking behaves to- 
wards any perceptual material with which it meets in just the same way 
in which the function we are considering behaves towards the content of 
dreams. It is the nature of our waking thought to establish order in mate- 
rial of that kind, to set up relations in it and to make it conform to our 
expectations of an intelligible whole. [Cf. pp. 60 f. and 76.] In fact, we 
go too far in that direction. An adept in sleight of hand can trick us by 
relying upon this intellectual habit of ours. In our efforts at making an in- 
telligible pattern of the sense-impressions that are offered to us, we often 
fall into the strangest errors or even falsify the truth about the material 
before us. 


1 [Freud’s first published use of the term seems to occur on p. 352; it is explained 
below on pp. 542 f. It appears as early as December 6, 1896, in his correspon- 
dence with Fliess (Freud, 1950a, Letter 52).] 




504 


VI. The Dream-Work 


The evidences of this are too universally known for there to be any 
need to insist upon them further. In our reading we pass over misprints 
which destroy the sense, and have the illusion that what we are reading is 
correct. The editor of a popular French periodical is said to have made a 
bet that he would have the words ‘in front’ or ‘behind’ inserted by the 
printer in every sentence of a long article without a single one of his read- 
ers noticing it. He won his bet. Many years ago I read in a newspaper a 
comic instance of a false connection. On one occasion during a sitting of 
the French Chamber a bomb thrown by an anarchist exploded in the 
Chamber itself and Dupuy subdued the consequent panic with the coura- 
geous words: ‘La seance continue. ’The visitors in the gallery were asked to 
give their impressions as witnesses of the outrage. Among them were two 
men from the provinces. One of these said that it was true that he had 
heard a detonation at the close of one of the speeches but had assumed 
that it was a parliamentary usage to fire a shot each time a speaker sat 
down. The second one, who had probably already heard several speeches, 
had come to the same conclusion, except that he supposed that a shot was 
only fired as a tribute to a particularly successful speech. 

There is no doubt, then, that it is our normal thinking that is the psy- 
chical agency which approaches the content of dreams with a demand that 
it must be intelligible, which subjects it to a first interpretation and which 
consequently produces a complete misunderstanding of it. [See p. 495.] 
For the purposes of our interpretation it remains an essential rule invari- 
ably to leave out of account the ostensible continuity of a dream as being 
of suspect origin, and to follow the same path back to the material of the 
dream-thoughts, no matter whether the dream itself is clear or confused. 

We now perceive, incidentally, on what it is that the range in the qual- 
ity of dreams between confusion and clarity which was discussed on p. 
346 depends. Those parts of a dream on which the secondary revision has 
been able to produce some effect are clear, while those parts on which its 
efforts have failed are confused. Since the confused parts of a dream are 
so often at the same time the less vivid parts, we may conclude that the 
secondary dream-work is also to be held responsible for a contribution to 
the plastic intensity of the different dream-elements. 

If I look around for something with which to compare the final form 
assumed by a dream as it appears after normal thought has made its con- 
tribution, I can think of nothing better than the enigmatic inscriptions 
with which Fliegende Blatter has for so long entertained its readers. They 
are intended to make the reader believe that a certain sentence — for the 



I. Secondary Revision 


505 


sake of contrast, a sentence in dialect and as scurrilous as possible — is a 
Latin inscription. For this purpose the letters contained in the words are 
torn out of their combination into syllables and arranged in a new order. 
Here and there a genuine Latin word appears; at other points we seem to 
see abbreviations of Latin words before us; and at still other points in 
the inscription we may allow ourselves to be deceived into overlooking the 
senselessness of isolated letters by parts of the inscription seeming to be de- 
faced or showing lacunae. If we are to avoid being taken in by the joke, we 
must disregard everything that makes it seem like an inscription, look 
firmly at the letters, pay no attention to their ostensible arrangement, and 
so combine them into words belonging to our own mother tongue. 1 

Secondary revision 2 is the one factor in the dream-work which has 
been observed by the majority of writers on the subject and of which the 
significance has been appreciated. Havelock Ellis (1911, 10-11) has given 
an amusing account of its functioning: ‘Sleeping consciousness we may 
even imagine as saying to itself in effect: “Here comes our master, Waking 
Consciousness, who attaches such mighty importance to reason and logic 
and so forth. Quick! gather things up, put them in order — any order will 
do — before he enters to take possession.’” 

The identity of its method of working with that of waking thought has 
been stated with particular clarity by Delacroix (1904, 926): ‘Cette fonc- 
tion d’interpretation n’est pas particuliere au reve; c’est le meme travail de 
coordination logique que nous faisons sur nos sensations pendant la 
veille.’ 3 James Sully [1893, 355-6] is of the same opinion. So, too, is To- 
bowolska (1900, 93): ‘Sur ces successions incoherentes d’hallucinations, 
l’esprit s’efforce de faire le meme travail de coordination logique qu’il fait 


1 [An instance of the operation of the process of secondary revision in the case of 
a fairy-tale is given on p. 261 f. and in the case of Oedipus Rex on p. 282. Its ap- 
plication to obsessions and phobias is mentioned on p. 262, and to paranoia in 
Lecture XXIV of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916-17). An example of sec- 
ondary revision in a telegraphic error is recorded in Chapter VI (No. 19) of The 
Psychopathology of Everyday Life (190 lb). The analogy between the secondary re- 
vision of dreams and the formation of ‘systems’ of thought is discussed at some 
length in Chapter III, Section 4, of Totem and Taboo (1912-13).] 

2 [The remainder of this chapter, with the exception of the last paragraph, which 
was in the original edition, was added in 1914.] 

3 [‘This interpretative function is not peculiar to dreams. It is the same work of log- 
ical co-ordination which we carry out upon our sensations while we are awake.’] 




506 


VI. The Dream-Work 


pendant la veille sur les sensations. II relie entre elles par un lien imaginaire 
toutes ces images decousues et bouche les ecarts trop grands qui se trou- 
vaient entre elles.’ 1 

According to some writers, this process of arranging and interpreting 
begins during the dream itself and is continued after waking. Thus Paul- 
han (1894, 546): ‘Cependant j’ai souvent pense qu’il pouvait y avoir une 
certaine deformation, ou plutot reformation, du reve dans le souvenir. . . . 
La tendence systematisante de l’imagination pourrait fort bien achever 
apres le reveil ce qu’elle a ebauche pendant le sommeil. De la sorte, la ra- 
pidite reelle de la pensee serait augmentee en apparence par les perfection- 
nements dus a l’imagination eveillee.’ 2 Bernard-Leroy and Tobowolska 
(1901, 592): ‘Dans le reve, au contraire, l’interpretation et la coordina- 
tion se font non seulement a l’aide des donnees du reve, mais encore a 
1’aide de celles de la veille. . . .’ 3 

Inevitably, therefore, this one recognized factor in the formation of 
dreams has had its importance overestimated, so that it has been credited 
with the whole achievement of the creation of dreams. This act of cre- 
ation, as Goblot (1896, 288 f.) and still more Foucault (1906) suppose, 
is performed at the moment of waking; for these two writers attribute to 
waking thought an ability to construct a dream out of the thoughts that 
emerge during sleep. Bernard-Leroy and Tobowolska (1901) comment 
on this view: ‘On a cru pouvoir placer le reve au moment du reveil, et ils 
ont attribue a la pensee de la veille la fonction de construire le reve avec 
les images presentes dans la pensee du sommeil.’ 4 


1 [‘The mind endeavours to carry out upon these incoherent trains of hallucina- 
tions the same work of logical co-ordination that it carries out upon sensations 
during the daytime. It connects up all these detached images by an imaginary 
link and stops up any excessively wide gaps between them.’] 

2 [‘I have often thought, however, that dreams may be to some extent misshaped, 
or rather reshaped, in memory. . . . The tendency of the imagination towards 
systematization might very well complete after waking what it had started upon 
in sleep. In that way the real speed of thought would be given an apparent in- 
crease by the improvements due to the waking imagination.’] 

3 [‘In a dream, on the contrary, interpretation and co-ordination are carried out 
by the help not only of the data presented in the dream, but of the data available 
in waking life. . . .’] 

4 [‘It has been thought possible to locate dreams at the moment of waking, and 
[these authors] have ascribed to waking thought the function of constructing 
dreams out of the images present in sleeping thought.’] 




I. Secondary Revision 


507 


From this discussion of secondary revision I will go on to consider a 
further factor in the dream-work which has recently been brought to light 
by some finely perceptive observations carried out by Herbert Silberer. As 
I have mentioned earlier (pp. 358 ff.), Silberer has, as it were, caught in 
the very act the process of transforming thoughts into images, by forcing 
himself into intellectual activity while he was in a state of fatigue and 
drowsiness. At such moments the thought with which he was dealing 
vanished and was replaced by a vision which turned out to be a substitute 
for what were as a rule abstract thoughts. (Cf. the examples in the passage 
just referred to.) Now it happened during these experiments that the im- 
age which arose, and which might be compared to an element of a dream, 
sometimes represented something other than the thought that was being 
dealt with — namely, the fatigue itself, the difficulty and unpleasure in- 
volved in the work. It represented, that is to say, the subjective state and 
mode of functioning of the person making the effort instead of the object 
of his efforts. Silberer described occurrences of this kind, which were very 
frequent in his case, as a ‘functional phenomenon’ in contrast to the ‘ma- 
terial phenomenon’ which would have been expected. 

For instance: ‘One afternoon I was lying on my sofa feeling extremely 
sleepy; nevertheless I forced myself to think over a philosophical problem. 
I wanted to compare the views of Kant and Schopenhauer upon Time. 
As a result of my drowsiness I was unable to keep the arguments of both 
of them before my mind at once, which was necessary in order to make 
the comparison. After a number of vain attempts, 1 once more impressed 
Kant’s deductions upon my mind with all the strength of my will, so that 
I might apply them to Schopenhauer’s statement of the problem. I then 
directed my attention to the latter; but when I tried to turn back again to 
Kant, I found that his argument had once more escaped me and I tried 
vainly to pick it up once more. This vain effort at recovering the Kant 
dossier which was stored away somewhere in my head was suddenly rep- 
resented before my closed eyes as a concrete and plastic symbol, as though 
it were a dream-picture: I was asking for information from a disobliging sec- 
retary who was bent over his writing-table and refused to put himself out at 
my insistent demand. He half straightened himself and gave me a disagreeable 
and uncomplying look. ’ (Silberer, 1909, 513 f. [Freud’s italics.]) 

Here are some other instances, which relate to the oscillation between 
sleeping and waking: 

‘Example No. 2. — Circumstances: In the morning, at waking. While 1 
was at a certain depth of sleep (a twilight state) and reflecting over a previous 



508 


VI. The Dream-Work 


dream and in a sort of way continuing to dream it, I felt myself approaching 
nearer to waking consciousness but wanted to remain in the twilight state. 

‘Scene: / was stepping across a brook with one foot but drew it back again 
at once with the intention of remaining on this side. ’ (Silberer, 1911, 625 .) 

‘Example No. 6 — Conditions as in example No. 4’ (in which he had 
wanted to lie in bed a little longer, though without oversleeping). ‘I 
wanted to give way to sleep for a little longer. 

‘Scene: I ivas saying good-bye to someone and was arranging with him (or 
her) to meet him (or her) again soon. ’ (Ibid., 627.) 

The ‘functional’ phenomenon, ‘the representation of a state instead of 
an object,’ was observed by Silberer principally in the two conditions of 
falling asleep and waking up. It is obvious that dream-interpretation is 
only concerned with the latter case. Silberer has given examples which 
show convincingly that in many dreams the last pieces of the manifest 
content, which are immediately followed by waking, represent nothing 
more nor less than an intention to wake or the process of waking. The 
representation may be in terms of such images as crossing a threshold 
(‘threshold symbolism’), leaving one room and entering another, depar- 
ture, home-coming, parting with a companion, diving into water, etc. I 
cannot, however, refrain from remarking that I have come across dream- 
elements which can be related to threshold symbolism, whether in my 
own dreams or in those of subjects whom I have analysed, far less fre- 
quently than Silberer’s communications would have led one to expect. 

It is by no means inconceivable or improbable that this threshold sym- 
bolism might throw light upon some elements in the middle of the tex- 
ture of dreams — in places, for instance, where there is a question of 
oscillations in the depth of sleep and of an inclination to break off the 
dream. Convincing instances of this, however, have not been produced. 1 
What seem to occur more frequently are cases of overdetermination, in 
which a part of a dream which has derived its material content from the 
nexus of dream-thoughts is employed to represent in addition some state 
of mental activity. 

This very interesting functional phenomenon of Silberer’s has, through 
no fault of its discoverer’s, led to many abuses; for it has been regarded as 
lending support to the old inclination to give abstract and symbolic inter- 
pretations to dreams. The preference for the ‘functional category’ is carried 
so far by some people that they speak of the functional phenomenon 


1 [See, however, a subsequent remark by Freud on p. 559 below.] 




I. Secondary Revision 


509 


wherever intellectual activities or emotional processes occur in the dream- 
thoughts, although such material has neither more nor less right than any 
other kind to find its way into a dream as residues of the previous day. [Cf. 
pp. 236 n. 3, and 421 n.\ 

We are ready to recognize the fact that Silberer’s phenomena constitute 
a second contribution on the part of waking thought to the construction 
of dreams; though it is less regularly present and less significant than the 
first one, which has already been introduced under the name of ‘secondary 
revision.’ It has been shown that a part of the attention which operates 
during the day continues to be directed towards dreams during the state 
of sleep, that it keeps a check on them and criticizes them and reserves the 
power to interrupt them. It has seemed plausible to recognize in the men- 
tal agency which thus remains awake the censor 1 to whom we have had to 
attribute such a powerful restricting influence upon the form taken by 
dreams. What Silberer’s observations have added to this is the fact that in 
certain circumstances a species of self-observation plays a part in this and 
makes a contribution to the content of the dream. The probable relations 
of this self-observing agency, which may be particularly prominent in 
philosophical minds, to endopsychic perception, to delusions of observa- 
tion, to conscience and to the censor of dreams can be more appropriately 
treated elsewhere. 2 

I will now try to sum up this lengthy disquisition on the dream-work. 
We were faced by the question whether the mind employs the whole of its 
faculties without reserve in constructing dreams or only a functionally re- 
stricted fragment of them. Our investigations led us to reject entirely the 
form in which the question was framed as being inadequate to the circum- 
stances. If, however, we had to reply to the question on the basis of the 
terms in which it was stated, we should be obliged to reply in the affirma- 
tive to both the alternatives, mutually exclusive though they appear to be. 
Two separate functions may be distinguished in mental activity during the 


1 [Freud almost always uses the German word ‘Zensur’i^ censorship’); but here and 
a few lines lower down he uses the personal form Zensor’ (‘censor’). Other in- 
stances of this very rare occurrence will be found in Section III of the paper on 
‘Narcissism’ (Freud, 1914c) and in Lecture XXIX of the New Introductory Lec- 
tures (Freud, 1933a).] 

2 [Footnote added 1914;] ‘On Narcissism’ (Freud, 1914c [Section III]). — The next 
paragraph appeared in the first edition. 




510 


VI. The Dream-Work 


construction of a dream: the production of the dream-thoughts, and their 
transformation into the content of the dream. The dream-thoughts are en- 
tirely rational and are constructed with an expenditure of all the psychical 
energy of which we are capable. They have their place among thought- 
processes that have not become conscious — processes from which, after 
some modification, our conscious thoughts, too, arise. However many in- 
teresting and puzzling questions the dream-thoughts may involve, such 
questions have, after all, no special relation to dreams and do not call for 
treatment among the problems of dreams . 1 On the other hand, the second 
function of mental activity during dream-construction, the transformation 
of the unconscious thoughts into the content of the dream, is peculiar to 
dream-life and characteristic of it. This dream-work proper diverges further 
from our picture of waking thought than has been supposed even by the 
most determined depredator of psychical functioning during the formation 
of dreams. The dream-work is not simply more careless, more irrational, 
more forgetful and more incomplete than waking thought; it is completely 
different from it qualitatively and for that reason not immediately compa- 
rable with it. It does not think, calculate or judge in any way at all; it re- 
stricts itself to giving things a new form. It is exhaustively described by an 
enumeration of the conditions which it has to satisfy in producing its 
result. That product, the dream, has above all to evade the censorship, and 


1 \Footnote added 1925:] I used at one time to find it extraordinarily difficult to 
accustom readers to the distinction between the manifest content of dreams and 
the latent dream-thoughts. Again and again arguments and objections would be 
brought up based upon some uninterpreted dream in the form in which it had 
been retained in the memory, and the need to interpret it would be ignored. But 
now that analysts at least have become reconciled to replacing the manifest 
dream by the meaning revealed by its interpretation, many of them have become 
guilty of falling into another confusion which they cling to with equal obstinacy. 
They seek to find the essence of dreams in their latent content and in so doing 
they overlook the distinction between the latent dream-thoughts and the dream- 
work. At bottom, dreams are nothing other than a particular form of thinking, 
made possible by the conditions of the state of sleep. It is the dream-iuork which 
creates that form, and it alone is the essence of dreaming — the explanation of its 
peculiar nature. I say this in order to make it possible to assess the value of the 
notorious ‘prospective purpose’ of dreams. [See below, p. 577 n.] The fact that 
dreams concern themselves with attempts at solving the problems by which our 
mental life is faced is no more strange than that our conscious waking life should 
do so; beyond this it merely tells us that that activity can also be carried on in 
the preconscious — and this we already knew. 




I. Secondary Revision 


511 


with that end in view the dream-work makes use of a displacement of psy- 
chical intensities to the point of a transvaluation of all psychical values. The 
thoughts have to be reproduced exclusively or predominantly in the mate- 
rial of visual and acoustic memory-traces, and this necessity imposes upon 
the dream- work considerations ofrepresentability which it meets by carrying 
out fresh displacements. Greater intensities have probably to be produced 
than are available in the dream-thoughts at night, and this purpose is 
served by the extensive condensation which is carried out with the constit- 
uents of the dream-thoughts. Little attention is paid to the logical relations 
between the thoughts; those relations are ultimately given a disguised rep- 
resentation in certain formal characteristics of dreams. Any affect attached 
to the dream-thoughts undergoes less modification than their ideational 
content. Such affects are as a rule suppressed; when they are retained, they 
are detached from the ideas that properly belong to them, affects of a sim- 
ilar character being brought together. Only a single portion of the dream- 
work and one which operates to an irregular degree, the working over of 
the material by partly aroused waking thought, tallies to some extent with 
the view which other writers have sought to apply to the entire activity of 
dream-construction. 1 


1 [At this point there followed in the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh editions 
(from 1914 to 1922) two self-contained essays by Otto Rank, bearing the titles 
‘Dreams and Creative Writing’ and ‘Dreams and Myths.’ These were omitted 
from the Gesammelte Schriften, 1924, with a comment by Freud ( 3 , 150) that 
they were ‘naturally not included in a collected edition of my works.’ They were, 
however, not re-inserted in the subsequent (eighth) edition of 1930. See the Ed- 
itor’s Introduction, p. xxi.] 





CHAPTER VII 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM-PROCESSES 1 


Among the dreams which have been reported to me by other people, 
there is one which has special claims upon our attention at this point. It 
was told to me by a woman patient who had herself heard it in a lecture 
on dreams: its actual source is still unknown to me. Its content made an 
impression on the lady, however, and she proceeded to ‘re-dream’ it, that 
is, to repeat some of its elements in a dream of her own, so that, by taking 
it over in this way, she might express her agreement with it on one partic- 
ular point. 

The preliminaries to this model dream were as follows. A father had 
been watching beside his child’s sick-bed for days and nights on end. After 
the child had died, he went into the next room to lie down, but left the 
door open so that he could see from his bedroom into the room in which 
his child’s body was laid out, with tall candles standing round it. An old 
man had been engaged to keep watch over it, and sat beside the body mur- 
muring prayers. After a few hours’ sleep, the father had a dream that his 
child was standing beside his bed, caught him by the arm and whispered to 
him reproachfully: ‘Father, don ’tyou see I’m burning ?’ He woke up, noticed 
a bright glare of light from the next room, hurried into it and found that 
the old watchman had dropped off to sleep and that the wrappings and 


1 [Some light has been thrown on the difficulties presented in the later sections of 
this chapter by Freud’s early correspondence with Wilhelm Fliess (Freud, 
1950a). Cf. the Editor’s Introduction (p. xv ff.).] 


513 




514 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


one of the arms of his beloved child’s dead body had been burned by a 
lighted candle that had fallen on them. 

The explanation of this moving dream is simple enough and, so my 
patient told me, was correctly given by the lecturer. The glare of light 
shone through the open door into the sleeping man’s eyes and led him to 
the conclusion which he would have arrived at if he had been awake, 
namely that a candle had fallen over and set something alight in the 
neighbourhood of the body. It is even possible that he had felt some con- 
cern when he went to sleep as to whether the old man might not be in- 
competent to carry out his task. 

Nor have I any changes to suggest in this interpretation except to add 
that the content of the dream must have been overdetermined and that 
the words spoken by the child must have been made up of words which 
he had actually spoken in his lifetime and which were connected with im- 
portant events in the father’s mind. For instance, I’m burning may have 
been spoken during the fever of the child’s last illness, and 'Father, don ’t 
you see ?’ may have been derived from some other highly emotional situa- 
tion of which we are in ignorance. 

But, having recognized that the dream was a process with a meaning, 
and that it can be inserted into the chain of the dreamer’s psychical expe- 
riences, we may still wonder why it was that a dream occurred at all in 
such circumstances, when the most rapid possible awakening was called 
for. And here we shall observe that this dream, too, contained the fulfil- 
ment of a wish. The dead child behaved in the dream like a living one: he 
himself warned his father, came to his bed, and caught him by the arm, 
just as he had probably done on the occasion from the memory of which 
the first part of the child’s words in the dream were derived. For the sake 
of the fulfilment of this wish the father prolonged his sleep by one mo- 
ment. The dream was preferred to a waking reflection because it was able 
to show the child as once more alive. If the father had woken up first and 
then made the inference that led him to go into the next room, he would, 
as it were, have shortened his child’s life by that moment of time. 

There can be no doubt what the peculiar feature is which attracts our in- 
terest to this brief dream. Hitherto we have been principally concerned with 
the secret meaning of dreams and the method of discovering it and with the 
means employed by the dream-work for concealing it. The problems of 
dream-interpretation have hitherto occupied the centre of the picture. And 
now we come upon a dream which raises no problem of interpretation and 



VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


515 


the meaning of which is obvious, but which, as we see, nevertheless retains 
the essential characteristics that differentiate dreams so strikingly from wak- 
ing life and consequently call for explanation. It is only after we have dis- 
posed of everything that has to do with the work of interpretation that we 
can begin to realize the incompleteness of our psychology of dreams. 

But before starting off along this new path, it will be well to pause and 
look around, to see whether in the course of our journey up to this point 
we have overlooked anything of importance. For it must be clearly under- 
stood that the easy and agreeable portion of our journey lies behind us. 
Hitherto, unless I am greatly mistaken, all the paths along which we have 
travelled have led us towards the light — towards elucidation and fuller 
understanding. But as soon as we endeavour to penetrate more deeply 
into the mental process involved in dreaming, every path will end in 
darkness. There is no possibility of explaining dreams as a psychical pro- 
cess, since to explain a thing means to trace it back to something already 
known, and there is at the present time no established psychological 
knowledge under which we could subsume what the psychological exam- 
ination of dreams enables us to infer as a basis for their explanation. On 
the contrary, we shall be obliged to set up a number of fresh hypotheses 
which touch tentatively upon the structure of the apparatus of the mind 
and upon the play of forces operating in it. We must be careful, however, 
not to pursue these hypotheses too far beyond their first logical links, or 
their value will be lost in uncertainties. Even if we make no false infer- 
ences and take all the logical possibilities into account, the probable in- 
completeness of our premises threatens to bring our calculation to a 
complete miscarriage. No conclusions upon the construction and work- 
ing methods of the mental instrument can be arrived at or at least fully 
proved from even the most painstaking investigation of dreams or of any 
other mental function taken in isolation. To achieve this result, it will be 
necessary to correlate all the established implications derived from a com- 
parative study of a whole series of such functions. Thus the psychological 
hypotheses to which we are led by an analysis of the processes of dream- 
ing must be left, as it were, in suspense, until they can be related to the 
findings of other enquiries which seek to approach the kernel of the same 
problem from another angle. 



516 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


(A) 

THE FORGETTING OF DREAMS 

I suggest, therefore, that we should first turn to a topic that raises a dif- 
ficulty which we have not hitherto considered but which is nevertheless 
capable of cutting the ground from under all our efforts at interpreting 
dreams. It has been objected on more than one occasion that we have in 
fact no knowledge of the dreams that we set out to interpret, or, speaking 
more correctly, that we have no guarantee that we know them as they ac- 
tually occurred. (See pp. 76 f.) 

In the first place, what we remember of a dream and what we exercise 
our interpretative arts upon has been mutilated by the untrustworthiness 
of our memory, which seems quite especially incapable of retaining a 
dream and may well have lost precisely the most important parts of its 
content. It quite frequently happens that when we seek to turn our atten- 
tion to one of our dreams we find ourselves regretting the fact that, though 
we dreamt far more, we can remember nothing but a single fragment 
which is itself recollected with peculiar uncertainty. 

Secondly, there is every reason to suspect that our memory of dreams 
is not only fragmentary but positively inaccurate and falsified. On the one 
hand it may be doubted whether what we dreamt was really as discon- 
nected and hazy as our recollection of it; and on the other hand it may also 
be doubted whether a dream was really as connected as it is in the account 
we give of it, whether in attempting to reproduce it we do not fill in what 
was never there, or what has been forgotten, with new and arbitrarily se- 
lected material, whether we do not add embellishments and trimmings 
and round it off so that there is no possibility of deciding what its original 
content may have been. Indeed one author, Spitta (1882, [338]), 1 goes to 
the point of suggesting that in so far as a dream shows any kind of order 
or coherence, these qualities are only introduced into it when we try to re- 
call it to mind. [Cf. p. 77.] Thus there seems to be a danger that the very 


1 [Added in text in 1914 and transferred to footnote in 1930:] So too Foucault 
[1906, 141 fi] and Tannery [1898]. 




A. The Forgetting of Dreams 


517 


thing whose value we have undertaken to assess may slip completely 
through our fingers. 

Hitherto in interpreting dreams we have disregarded such warnings. On 
the contrary, we have accepted it as being just as important to interpret the 
smallest, least conspicuous and most uncertain constituents of the content 
of dreams as those that are most clearly and certainly preserved. The dream 
oflrma’s injection contained the phrase ‘I at once called in Dr. M.’ [p. 136]; 
and we assumed that even this detail would not have found its way into the 
dream unless it had had some particular origin. It was thus that we came 
upon the story of the unfortunate patient to whose bedside I had ‘at once’ 
called in my senior colleague. In the apparently absurd dream which treated 
the difference between 5 1 and 56 as a negligible quantity, the number 5 1 
was mentioned several times. [See p. 443.] Instead of regarding this as a mat- 
ter of course or as something indifferent, we inferred from it that there was 
a second line of thought in the latent content of the dream leading to the 
number 5 1 ; and along this track we arrived at my fears of 5 1 years being the 
limit of my life, in glaring contrast to the dream’s dominant train of thought 
which was lavish in its boasts of a long life. In the ‘Non vixit dream [pp. 430 
ff.] there was an inconspicuous interpolation which I overlooked at first: ‘As 
P. failed to understand him, FI. asked me, ’ etc. When the interpretation was 
held up, I went back to these words and it was they that led me on to the 
childhood phantasy which turned out to be an intermediate nodal point in 
the dream-thoughts. [See pp. 488 fi] This was arrived at by way of the lines: 

Selten habt ihr mich verstanden, 

Selten auch verstand ich Euch, 

Nur wenn wir im Kot uns fanden, 

So verstanden wir uns gleich. 1 

Examples could be found in every analysis to show that precisely the most 
trivial elements of a dream are indispensable to its interpretation and that the 
work in hand is held up if attention is not paid to these elements until too 
late. We have attached no less importance in interpreting dreams to every 
shade of the form of words in which they were laid before us. And even 
when it happened that the text of the dream as we had it was meaningless or 


1 [Literally: ‘Rarely have you understood me, and rarely too have I understood you. 
Not until we both found ourselves in the mud did we promptly understand each 
other.’ Heine, Buck der Lieder, ‘Die Heimkehr,’ LXXVIII.] 




518 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


inadequate — as though the effort to give a correct account of it had been 
unsuccessful — we have taken this defect into account as well. In short, we 
have treated as Holy Writ what previous writers have regarded as an arbitrary 
improvisation, hurriedly patched together in the embarrassment of the mo- 
ment. This contradiction stands in need of an explanation. 

The explanation is in our favour, though without putting the other 
writers in the wrong. In the light of our newly-won understanding of the 
origin of dreams the contradiction disappears completely. It is true that 
we distort dreams in attempting to reproduce them; here we find at work 
once more the process which we have described as the secondary (and of- 
ten ill conceived) revision of the dream by the agency which carries out 
normal thinking [pp. 493 ff.]. But this distortion is itself no more than a 
part of the revision to which the dream-thoughts are regularly subjected 
as a result of the dream-censorship. The other writers have at this point 
noticed or suspected the part of dream-distortion which operates mani- 
festly; we are less interested, since we know that a much more far-reaching 
process of distortion, though a less obvious one, has already developed the 
dream out of the hidden dream-thoughts. The only mistake made by pre- 
vious writers has been in supposing that the modification of the dream in 
the course of being remembered and put into words is an arbitrary one 
and cannot be further resolved and that it is therefore calculated to give 
us a misleading picture of the dream. 1 They have underestimated the ex- 
tent to which psychical events are determined. There is nothing arbitrary 
about them. It can be shown quite generally that if an element is left un- 
determined by one train of thought, its determination is immediately ef- 
fected by a second one. For instance, I may try to think of a number 
arbitrarily. But this is impossible: the number that occurs to me will be 
unambiguously and necessarily determined by thoughts of mine, though 
they may be remote from my immediate intention. 2 The modifications 


1 [A misunderstanding in a contrary direction of the importance of the text of 
dreams is discussed towards the end of Freud’s paper on the technical uses of 
dream-interpretation in therapeutic analyses (1911?).] 

1 [Footnote added 1909:] See my Psychopathology of Everyday Life [1901^, Chapter 
XII(A), Nos. 2 to 7. — No. 2 relates to a letter written by Freud to Fliess on Au- 
gust 27, 1899 (Freud, 1950 a. Letter 1 16), while he was correcting the proofs of 
the present volume, in which he prophesied that the book would contain 2,467 
misprints. (See below, p. 534 n. 2.)]. 




A. The Forgetting of Dreams 


519 


to which dreams are submitted under the editorship of waking life are 
just as little arbitrary. They are associatively linked to the material which 
they replace, and serve to show us the way to that material, which may in 
its turn be a substitute for something else. 

In analysing the dreams of my patients I sometimes put this assertion 
to the following test, which has never failed me. If the first account given 
me by a patient of a dream is too hard to follow I ask him to repeat it. In 
doing so he rarely uses the same words. But the parts of the dream which 
he describes in different terms are by that fact revealed to me as the weak 
spot in the dream’s disguise: they serve my purpose just as Hagen’s was 
served by the embroidered mark on Siegfried’s cloak . 1 That is the point 
at which the interpretation of the dream can be started. My request to the 
patient to repeat his account of the dream has warned him that I was pro- 
posing to take special pains in solving it; under pressure of the resistance, 
therefore, he hastily covers the weak spots in the dream’s disguise by re- 
placing any expressions that threaten to betray its meaning by other less 
revealing ones. In this way he draws my attention to the expression which 
he has dropped out. The trouble taken by the dreamer in preventing the 
solution of the dream gives me a basis for estimating the care with which 
its cloak has been woven. 

Previous writers have had less justification in devoting so much space 
to the doicbt with which our judgement receives accounts of dreams. For 
this doubt has no intellectual warrant. There is in general no guarantee of 
the correctness of our memory; and yet we yield to the compulsion to at- 
tach belief to its data far more often than is objectively justified. Doubt 
whether a dream or certain of its details have been correctly reported is 
once more a derivative of the dream-censorship, of resistance to the pene- 
tration of the dream-thoughts into consciousness . 2 This resistance has not 
been exhausted even by the displacements and substitutions it has brought 
about; it persists in the form of doubt attaching to the material which has 
been allowed through. We are especially inclined to misunderstand this 


1 [There was only one spot on Siegfried’s body where he could be wounded. By a 
trick, Hagen persuaded Kriemhild, who alone knew where the spot was, to em- 
broider a small cross on Siegfried’s cloak at the vital point. It was there that Ha- 
gen later stabbed him. (Nibelungenlied, XV and XVL.)] 

2 [For the same mechanism of doubt in cases of hysteria see a passage near the be- 
ginning of Part I of the case history of ‘Dora’ (1905f).] 




520 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


doubt since it is careful never to attack the more intense elements of a 
dream but only the weak and indistinct ones. As we already know, how- 
ever, a complete reversal of all psychical values takes place between the 
dream-thoughts and the dream [p. 345]. Distortion is only made possible 
by a withdrawal of psychical value; it habitually expresses itself by that 
means and is occasionally content to require nothing more. If, then, an in- 
distinct element of a dream’s content is in addition attacked by doubt, we 
have a sure indication that we are dealing with a comparatively direct de- 
rivative of one of the proscribed dream- thoughts. The state of things is 
what it was after some sweeping revolution in one of the republics of an- 
tiquity or the Renaissance. The noble and powerful families which had 
previously dominated the scene were sent into exile and all the high offices 
were filled by newcomers. Only the most impoverished and powerless 
members of the vanquished families, or their remote dependents, were al- 
lowed to remain in the city; and even so they did not enjoy full civic rights 
and were viewed with distrust. The distrust in this analogy corresponds to 
the doubt in the case we are considering. That is why in analysing a dream 
I insist that the whole scale of estimates of certainty shall be abandoned 
and that the faintest possibility that something of this or that sort may 
have occurred in the dream shall be treated as complete certainty. In trac- 
ing any element of a dream it will be found that unless this attitude is 
firmly adopted the analysis will come to a standstill. If any doubt is thrown 
upon the value of the element in question, the psychical result in the pa- 
tient is that none of the involuntary ideas underlying that element comes 
into his head. This result is not a self-evident one. It would not make non- 
sense if someone were to say: ‘I don’t know for certain whether such and 
such a thing came into the dream, but here is what occurs to me in con- 
nection with it.’ But in fact no one ever does say this; and it is precisely the 
fact that doubt produces this interrupting effect upon an analysis that re- 
veals it as a derivative and tool of psychical resistance. Psycho-analysis is 
justly suspicious. One of its rules is that whatever interrupts the progress of 
analytic work is a resistance . 1 


1 [ Footnote added 1925:] The proposition laid down in these peremptory terms — 
‘whatever interrupts the progress of analytic work is a resistance’ — is easily open 
to misunderstanding. It is of course only to be taken as a technical rule, as a 
warning to analysts. It cannot be disputed that in the course of an analysis vari- 
ous events may occur the responsibility for which cannot be laid upon the pa- 
tient’s intentions. His father may die without his having murdered him; or a war 




A. The Forgetting of Dreams 


521 


The forgetting of dreams, too, remains inexplicable unless the power of 
the psychical censorship is taken into account. In a number of cases the 
feeling of having dreamt a great deal during the night and of only having 
retained a little of it may in fact have some other meaning, such as that 
the dream-work has been perceptibly proceeding all through the night 
but has only left a short dream behind. [Cf. pp. 297, 494, and 574 £] It 
is no doubt true that we forget dreams more and more as time passes after 
waking; we often forget them in spite of the most painstaking efforts to 
recall them. But I am of opinion that the extent of this forgetting is as a 
rule overestimated; and there is a similar overestimation of the extent to 
which the gaps in a dream limit our knowledge of it. It is often possible 
by means of analysis to restore all that has been lost by the forgetting of 
the dream’s content; at least, in quite a number of cases one can recon- 
struct from a single remaining fragment not, it is true, the dream — which 
is in any case a matter of no importance — but all the dream-thoughts. 
This demands a certain amount of attention and self-discipline in carry- 
ing out the analysis; that is all — but it shows that there was no lack of a 
hostile (i.e. resistant) purpose at work in the forgetting of the dream. 1 


may break out which brings the analysis to an end. But behind its obvious exag- 
geration the proposition is asserting something both true and new. Even if the 
interrupting event is a real one and independent of the patient, it often depends 
on him how great an interruption it causes; and resistance shows itself unmis- 
takably in the readiness with which he accepts an occurrence of this kind or the 
exaggerated use which he makes of it. 

1 [ Footnote added 1919:] I may quote the following dream from my Introductory 
Lectures [Freud, 1916-17, Lecture VII] as an example of the meaning of doubt 
and uncertainty in a dream and of its content being at the same time shrunk 
down to a single element; in spite of this the dream was successfully analysed af- 
ter a short delay: 

‘A sceptical woman patient had a longish dream in the course of which some 
people told her about my book on jokes and praised it highly. Something came 
in then about a “channel, ’’perhaps it was another book that mentioned a channel, 
or something else about a channel . . . she didn ’t knoiv ... it was all so indistinct. 

‘No doubt you will be inclined to expect that the element “channel,” since it was 
so indistinct, would be inaccessible to interpretation. You are right in suspecting a 
difficulty; but the difficulty did not arise from the indistinctness: both the difficulty 
and the indistinctness arose from another cause. Nothing occurred to the dreamer 
in connection with “channel,” and / could of course throw no light on it. A little 
later — it was the next day, in point of fact — she told me that she had thought of 
something that might have something to do with it. It was a joke, too — a joke she 




522 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


Convincing evidence of the fact that the forgetting of dreams is ten- 
dentious and serves the purpose of resistance 1 is afforded when it is pos- 
sible to observe in analyses a preliminary stage of forgetting. It not 
infrequently happens that in the middle of the work of interpretation an 
omitted portion of the dream comes to light and is described as having 
been forgotten till that moment. Now a part of a dream that has been res- 
cued from oblivion in this way is invariably the most important part; it 
always lies on the shortest road to the dream’s solution and has for that 
reason been exposed to resistance more than any other part. Among the 
specimen dreams scattered through this volume, there is one in which a 
part of its content was added like this as an after-thought. 2 It is the travel 
dream in which I revenged myself on two disagreeable fellow-travellers 
and which I had to leave almost uninterpreted on account of its gross in- 
decency. [See pp. 462 ff.] The omitted portion ran as follows: ‘I said [in 
English], referring to one of Schiller’s works: “It is from ...” btit, noticing 
the mistake, I corrected myself “It is by . . “Yes, ” the man commented to his 
sister, “he said that right. ”’ 3 


had heard. On the steamer between Dover and Calais a well-known author fell into 
conversation with an Englishman. The latter had occasion to quote the phrase: 
“Du sublime au ridicule il n’y a qu’un pas. [It is only a step from the sublime to 
the ridiculous.]” Yes, replied the author, “le Pas de Calais” — meaning that he 
thought France sublime and England ridiculous. But the Pas de Calais is a chan- 
nel — the English Channel. You will ask whether I think this had anything to do 
with the dream. Certainly I think so; and it provides the solution of the puzzling 
element of the dream. Can you doubt that this joke was already present before the 
dream occurred, as the unconscious thought behind the element “channel”? Can 
you suppose that it was introduced as a subsequent invention? The association be- 
trayed the scepticism which lay concealed behind the patient’s ostensible admira- 
tion; and her resistance against revealing this was no doubt the common cause both 
of her delay in producing the association and of the indistinctness of the dream- 
element concerned. Consider the relation of the dream-element to its unconscious 
background: it was, as it were, a fragment of that background, an allusion to it, but 
it was made quite incomprehensible by being isolated.’ 

1 On the purposes of forgetting in general see my short paper on the psychical mech- 
anism of forgetting (Freud, 1898^). \Added 1909:] Later included [with modifica- 
tions] as the first chapter in my Psychopathology of Everyday Life (Freud, 1901 b). 

2 [Another instance will be found on p. 178 n. Yet another occurs in the analysis 
of Dora’s second dream (Freud, 1905c, Section III).] 

3 [Footnote added 1914:] Corrections such as this in the usages of foreign lan- 
guages are not infrequent in dreams but are more often attributed to other 




A. The Forgetting of Dreams 


523 


Self-corrections in dreams, which seem so marvellous to some writers, 
need not occupy our attention. I will indicate instead the recollection 
which served as the model for my verbal error in this dream. When I was 
nineteen years old I visited England for the first time and spent a whole 
day on the shore of the Irish Sea. I naturally revelled in the opportunity of 
collecting the marine animals left behind by the tide and I was occupied 
with a starfish — the words ‘Hollthiirn ’ and ‘holothurians [sea-slugs] ’ oc- 
curred at the beginning of the dream — when a charming little girl came 
up to me and said: ‘Is it a starfish? Is it alive?’ ‘Yes,’ I replied, ‘he is alive,’ 
and at once, embarrassed at my mistake, repeated the sentence correctly. 
The dream replaced the verbal error which I then made by another into 
which a German is equally liable to fall. ‘Das Buch ist von Schiller ’ should 
be translated not with a ‘from’ but with a ‘by.’ After all that we have heard 
of the purposes of the dream-work and its reckless choice of methods for 
attaining them, we shall not be surprised to hear that it effected this re- 
placement because of the magnificent piece of condensation that was 
made possible by the identity of sound of the English ‘from’ and the Ger- 
man adjective ‘fromm ’ [‘pious’] . But how did my blameless memory of the 
sea-shore come to be in the dream? It served as the most innocent possible 
example of my using a word indicating gender or sex in the wrong place — 
of my bringing in sex (the word ‘he’) where it did not belong. This, inci- 
dentally, was one of the keys to the solution of the dream. No one who has 
heard, furthermore, the origin attributed to the title of Clerk-Maxwell’s 
‘Matter and Motion [mentioned in the dream, p. 463] will have any diffi- 
culty in filling in the gaps: Moliere’s ‘Le Malade Imaginaire’ — ‘La matiere 
est-elle laudable?’ 1 — A motion of the bowels. 

Moreover I am in a position to offer an ocular demonstration of the fact 
that the forgetting of dreams is to a great extent a product of resistance. 
One of my patients will tell me he has had a dream but has forgotten every 
trace of it: it is therefore just as though it had never happened. We proceed 
with our work. I come up against a resistance; I therefore explain something 
to the patient and help him by encouragement and pressure to come to 


people. Maury (1878, 143) once dreamt, at a time when he was learning En- 
glish, that, in telling someone that he had visited him the day before, he used 
the words ‘I called for you yesterday.’ Whereupon the other answered correctly: 
‘You should have said “I called on you yesterday.’” 

1 [‘Is the matter laudable?’ — Old medical terminology for 'Is the excretion 
healthy?’ — The next phrase is in English in the original.] 




524 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


terms with some disagreeable thought. Hardly have I succeeded in this than 
he exclaims: ‘Now I remember what it was I dreamt.’ The same resistance 
which interfered with our work that day also made him forget the dream. 
By overcoming this resistance I have recalled the dream to his memory. 

In just the same way, when a patient reaches some particular point in his 
work, he may be able to remember a dream which he had dreamt three or 
four or even more days before and which had hitherto remained forgotten. 1 

Psycho-analytic experience 2 has provided us with yet another proof 
that the forgetting of dreams depends far more upon resistance than upon 
the fact, stressed by the authorities, that the waking and sleeping states 
are alien to each other [p. 75]. It not infrequently happens to me, as well 
as to other analysts and to patients under treatment, that, having been 
woken up, as one might say, by a dream, I immediately afterwards, and 
in full possession of my intellectual powers, set about interpreting it. In 
such cases I have often refused to rest till I have arrived at a complete un- 
derstanding of the dream; yet it has sometimes been my experience that 
after finally waking up in the morning 1 have entirely forgotten both my 
interpretative activity and the content of the dream, though knowing that 
I have had a dream and interpreted it. 3 It happens far more often that the 
dream draws the findings of my interpretative activity back with it into 
oblivion than that my intellectual activity succeeds in preserving the 
dream in my memory. Yet there is no such psychical gulf between my in- 
terpretative activity and my waking thoughts as the authorities suppose 
to account for the forgetting of dreams. 

Morton Prince (1910 [141]) has objected to my explanation of the 
forgetting of dreams on the ground that that forgetting is only a special 
case of the amnesia attaching to dissociated mental states, that it is im- 
possible to extend my explanation of this special amnesia to other types 
and that my explanation is consequently devoid of value even for its im- 
mediate purpose. His readers are thus reminded that in the course of all 
his descriptions of these dissociated states he has never attempted to dis- 
cover a dynamic explanation of such phenomena. If he had, he would in- 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] Ernest Jones has described [1912 b\ an analogous case 
which often occurs: while a dream is being analysed the patient may recollect a 
second one which was dreamt during the same night but whose very existence 
had not been suspected. 

1 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1911.] 

3 [Cf. Postscript to the ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’ (Freud, 1922c).] 




A. The Forgetting of Dreams 


525 


evitably have found that repression (or, more precisely, the resistance cre- 
ated by it) is the cause both of the dissociations and of the amnesia at- 
taching to their psychical content. 

An observation which I have been able to make in the course of prepar- 
ing this manuscript has shown me that dreams are no more forgotten than 
other mental acts and can be compared, by no means to their disadvantage, 
with other mental functions in respect of their retention in the memory. I 
had kept records of a large number of my own dreams which for one reason 
or another I had not been able to interpret completely at the time or had left 
entirely uninterpreted. And now, between one and two years later, I have at- 
tempted to interpret some of them for the purpose of obtaining more mate- 
rial in illustration of my views. These attempts have been successful in every 
instance; indeed the interpretation may be said to have proceeded more eas- 
ily after this long interval than it did at the time when the dream was a recent 
experience. A possible explanation of this is that in the meantime I have 
overcome some of the internal resistances which previously obstructed me. 
When making these subsequent interpretations I have compared the dream- 
thoughts that I elicited at the time of the dream with the present, usually far 
more copious, yield, and 1 have always found that the old ones are included 
among the new. My astonishment at this was quickly halted by the reflection 
that I had long been in the habit of getting my patients, who sometimes tell 
me dreams dating from earlier years, to interpret them — by the same proce- 
dure and with the same success — as though they had dreamt them the night 
before. When I come to discuss anxiety-dreams I shall give two examples of 
postponed interpretations like these. [See pp. 581 ff] I was led into making 
my first experiment of this kind by the justifiable expectation that in this as 
in other respects dreams would behave like neurotic symptoms. When I treat 
a psychoneurotic — a hysteric, let us say — by psycho-analysis, 1 am obliged 
to arrive at an explanation for the earliest and long since vanished symptoms 
of his illness no less than for the contemporary ones which brought him to 
me for treatment; and I actually find the earlier problem easier to solve than 
the immediate one. As long ago as in 1895 I was able to give an explanation 
in Studies on Hysteria [Breuer and Freud, 1895, Case History V (Frau Cacilie 
M.)] of the first hysterical attack which a woman of over forty had had in 
her fifteenth year. 1 


1 [Added in the text in 1919 and transferred to a footnote in 1930:] Dreams 
which occur in the earliest years of childhood and are retained in the memory 
for dozens of years, often with complete sensory vividness, are almost always of 




526 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


And here I will mention a number of further, somewhat disconnected, 
points on the subject of interpreting dreams, which may perhaps help to 
give readers their bearings should they feel inclined to check my state- 
ments by subsequent work upon their own dreams. 

No one should expect that an interpretation of his dreams will fall into 
his lap like manna from the skies. Practice is needed even for perceiving 
endoptic phenomena or other sensations from which our attention is nor- 
mally withheld; and this is so even though there is no psychical motive 
fighting against such perceptions. It is decidedly more difficult to get hold 
of ‘involuntary ideas.’ Anyone who seeks to do so must familiarize himself 
with the expectations raised in the present volume and must, in accor- 
dance with the rules laid down in it, endeavour during the work to refrain 
from any criticism, any parti pris, and any emotional or intellectual bias. 
He must bear in mind Claude Bernard’s 1 advice to experimenters in a 
physiological laboratory: ‘travailler comme une bete’ — he must work, that 
is, with as much persistence as an animal and with as much disregard of 
the result. If this advice is followed, the task will no longer be a hard one. 

The interpretation of a dream cannot always be accomplished at a single 
sitting. When we have followed a chain of associations, it not infrequently 
happens that we feel our capacity exhausted; nothing more is to be learnt 
from the dream that day. The wisest plan then is to break off and resume 
our work another day: another part of the dream’s content may then attract 
our attention and give us access to another stratum of dream-thoughts. 
This procedure might be described as ‘fractional’ dream-interpretation. 

It is only with the greatest difficulty that the beginner in the business of 
interpreting dreams can be persuaded that his task is not at an end when he 
has a complete interpretation in his hands — an interpretation which makes 
sense, is coherent and throws light upon every element of the dream’s con- 
tent. For the same dream may perhaps have another interpretation as well, 
an ‘over-interpretation’, which has escaped him. It is, indeed, not easy to 
form any conception of the abundance of the unconscious trains of thought, 
all striving to find expression, which are active in our minds. Nor is it easy 


great importance in enabling us to understand the history of the subject’s mental 
development and of his neurosis. Analysis of such dreams protects the physician 
from errors and uncertainties which may lead, among other things, to theoretical 
confusion. [The example of the ‘Wolf Man’s’ dream was no doubt especially in 
Freud’s mind (1918^).] 

1 [The French physiologist (1813-78).] 




A. The Forgetting of Dreams 


527 


to credit the skill shown by the dream-work in always hitting upon forms of 
expression that can bear several meanings — like the Little Tailor in the fairy 
story who hit seven flies at a blow. My readers will always be inclined to ac- 
cuse me of introducing an unnecessary amount of ingenuity into my inter- 
pretations; but actual experience would teach them better. [See p. 315 «.] 
On the other hand, 1 I cannot confirm the opinion, first stated by Sil- 
berer [e.g. 1914, Part II, Section 5], that all dreams (or many dreams, or 
certain classes of dreams) require two different interpretations, which are 
even stated to bear a fixed relation to each other. One of these interpreta- 
tions, which Silberer calls the ‘psycho-analytic’ one, is said to give the 
dream some meaning or other, usually of an infantile-sexual kind; the other 
and more important interpretation, to which he gives the name of ‘ana- 
gogic,’ is said to reveal the more serious thoughts, often of profound im- 
port, which the dream-work has taken as its material. Silberer has not given 
evidence in support of this opinion by reporting a series of dreams analysed 
in the two directions. And I must object that the alleged fact is non- 
existent. In spite of what he says, the majority of dreams require no ‘over- 
interpretation’ and, more particularly, are insusceptible to an anagogic 
interpretation. As in the case of many other theories put forward in recent 
years, it is impossible to overlook the fact that Silberer’s views are influenced 
to some extent by a purpose which seeks to disguise the fundamental cir- 
cumstances in which dreams are formed and to divert interest from their 
instinctual roots. In a certain number of cases I have been able to confirm 
Silberer’s statements. Analysis showed that in such cases the dream-work 
found itself faced with the problem of transforming into a dream a series of 
highly abstract thoughts from waking life which were incapable of being 
given any direct representation. It endeavoured to solve the problem by get- 
ting hold of another group of intellectual material, somewhat loosely re- 
lated (often in a manner which might be described as ‘allegorical’) to the 
abstract thoughts, and at the same time capable of being represented with 
fewer difficulties. The abstract interpretation of a dream that has arisen in 
this way is given by the dreamer without any difficulty; the correct interpre- 
tation of the material that has been interpolated must be looked for by the 
technical methods which are now familiar to us. 2 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1919.] 

2 [Freud also discussed this point in a long footnote in his paper ‘A Metapsycho- 
logical Supplement to the Theory of Dreams’ (191 7d) and towards the end of 
his ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (1922a).] 




528 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


The question whether it is possible to interpret every dream must be an- 
swered in the negative. 1 It must not be forgotten that in interpreting a 
dream we are opposed by the psychical forces which were responsible for 
its distortion. It is thus a question of relative strength whether our intel- 
lectual interest, our capacity for self-discipline, our psychological knowl- 
edge and our practice in interpreting dreams enable us to master our 
internal resistances. It is always possible to go some distance: far enough, at 
all events, to convince ourselves that the dream is a structure with a mean- 
ing, and as a rule far enough to get a glimpse of what that meaning is. 
Quite often an immediately succeeding dream allows us to confirm and 
carry further the interpretation we have tentatively adopted for its prede- 
cessor. A whole series of dreams, continuing over a period of weeks or 
months, is often based upon common ground and must accordingly be in- 
terpreted in connection with one another. [Cf. pp. 215 and 375 £] In the 
case of two consecutive dreams it can often be observed that one takes as 
its central point something that is only on the periphery of the other and 
vice versa, so that their interpretations too are mutually complementary. 1 
have already given instances which show that different dreams dreamt on 
the same night are, as a quite general rule, to be treated in their interpreta- 
tion as a single whole. [See pp. 348 £] 

There is often a passage in even the most thoroughly interpreted dream 
which has to be left obscure; this is because we become aware during the 
work of interpretation that at that point there is a tangle of dream-thoughts 
which cannot be unravelled and which moreover adds nothing to our 
knowledge of the content of the dream. This is the dream’s navel, the spot 
where it reaches down into the unknown. [Cf. p. 135 «.] The dream- 
thoughts to which we are led by interpretation cannot, from the nature of 
things, have any definite endings; they are bound to branch out in every di- 
rection into the intricate network of our world of thought. It is at some 
point where this meshwork is particularly close that the dream-wish grows 
up, like a mushroom out of its mycelium. 

But we must return to the facts concerning the forgetting of dreams, 
for we have failed to draw one important conclusion from them. We have 
seen that waking life shows an unmistakable inclination to forget any 
dream that has been formed in the course of the night — whether as a 
whole directly after waking, or bit by bit in the course of the day; and we 

1 [This question is considered at greater length in Freud, 1925/’, Section A.] 




A. The Forgetting of Dreams 


529 


have recognized that the agent chiefly responsible for this forgetting is the 
mental resistance to the dream which has already done what it could 
against it during the night. But if all this is so, the question arises how it 
comes about that a dream can be formed at all in the face of this resis- 
tance. Let us take the most extreme case, in which waking life has got rid 
of a dream as though it had never occurred. A consideration of the inter- 
play of psychical forces in this case must lead us to infer that the dream 
would in fact not have occurred at all if the resistance had been as strong 
during the night as during the day. We must conclude that during the 
night the resistance loses some of its power, though we know it does not 
lose the whole of it, since we have shown the part it plays in the forma- 
tion of dreams as a distorting agent. But we are driven to suppose that its 
power may be diminished at night and that this makes the formation of 
dreams possible. This makes it easy to understand how, having regained 
its full strength at the moment of waking, it at once proceeds to get rid 
of what it was obliged to permit while it was weak. Descriptive psychol- 
ogy tells us that the principal sine qua non for the formation of dreams is 
that the mind shall be in a state of sleep; and we are now able to explain 
this fact: the state of sleep makes the formation of dreams possible because it 
reduces the power of the endopsychic censorship. 

It is no doubt tempting to regard this as the only possible inference 
that can be drawn from the facts of the forgetting of dreams, and to make 
it the basis for further conclusions as to the conditions of energy prevail- 
ing during sleeping and waking. For the moment, however, we will stop 
at this point. When we have entered a little more deeply into the psychol- 
ogy of dreams we shall find that the factors making possible the forma- 
tion of dreams can be viewed in another way as well. It may be that the 
resistance against the dream-thoughts becoming conscious can be evaded 
without any reduction having taken place in its power. And it seems a 
plausible idea that both of the two factors favouring the formation of 
dreams — the reduction and the evasion of the resistance — are simultane- 
ously made possible by the state of sleep. I will break off here, though I 
shall pick up the argument again presently. [Cf. pp. 572 £] 

There is another set of objections to our method of interpreting dreams 
with which we must now deal. Our procedure consists in abandoning all 
those purposive ideas which normally govern our reflections, in focussing 
our attention on a single element of the dream and in then taking note of 
whatever involuntary thoughts may occur to us in connection with it. We 



530 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


then take the next portion of the dream and repeat the process with it. We 
allow ourselves to be led on by our thoughts regardless of the direction in 
which they carry us and drift on in this way from one thing to another. 
But we cherish a confident belief that in the end, without any active inter- 
vention on our part, we shall arrive at the dream-thoughts from which the 
dream originated. 

Our critics argue against this along the following lines. There is noth- 
ing wonderful in the fact that a single element of the dream should lead 
us somewhere; every idea can be associated with something. What is re- 
markable is that such an aimless and arbitrary train of thought should 
happen to bring us to the dream-thoughts. The probability is that we are 
deceiving ourselves. We follow a chain of associations from one element, 
till, for one reason or another, it seems to break off. If we then take up a 
second element, it is only to be expected that the originally unrestricted 
character of our associations will be narrowed. For we still have the earlier 
chain of thoughts in our memory, and for that reason, in analysing the 
second dream-idea, we are more likely to hit upon associations which 
have something in common with associations from the first chain. We 
then delude ourselves into thinking that we have discovered a thought 
which is a connecting point between two elements of the dream. Since we 
give ourselves complete liberty to connect thoughts as we please and since 
in fact the only transitions from one idea to another which we exclude are 
those which operate in normal thinking, we shall find no difficulty in the 
long run in concocting out of a number of ‘intermediate thoughts’ some- 
thing which we describe as the dream-thoughts and which — though 
without any guarantee, since we have no other knowledge of what the 
dream-thoughts are — we allege to be the psychical substitute for the 
dream. But the whole thing is completely arbitrary; we are merely exploit- 
ing chance connections in a manner which gives an effect of ingenuity. In 
this way anyone who cares to take such useless pains can worry out any 
interpretation he pleases from any dream. 

If we were in fact met by objections such as these, we might defend 
ourselves by appealing to the impression made by our interpretations, to 
the surprising connections with other elements of the dream which emerge 
in the course of our pursuing a single one of its ideas, and to the improb- 
ability that anything which gives such an exhaustive account of the dream 
could have been arrived at except by following up psychical connections 
which had already been laid down. We might also point out in our defence 
that our procedure in interpreting dreams is identical with the procedure 



A. The Forgetting of Dreams 


531 


by which we resolve hysterical symptoms; and there the correctness of our 
method is warranted by the coincident emergence and disappearance of 
the symptoms, or, to use a simile, the assertions made in the text are borne 
out by the accompanying illustrations. But we have no reason for evading 
the problem of how it is possible to reach a pre-existing goal by following 
the drift of an arbitrary and purposeless chain of thoughts; since, though 
we may not be able to solve the problem, we can completely cut the 
ground from under it. 

For it is demonstrably untrue that we are being carried along a purpose- 
less stream of ideas when, in the process of interpreting a dream, we abandon 
reflection and allow involuntary ideas to emerge. It can be shown that all 
that we can ever get rid of are purposive ideas that are knoivn to us; as soon 
as we have done this, unknown — or, as we inaccurately say, ‘unconscious’ — 
purposive ideas take charge and thereafter determine the course of the invol- 
untary ideas. No influence that we can bring to bear upon our mental 
processes can ever enable us to think without purposive ideas; nor am I 
aware of any states of psychical confusion which can do so . 1 Psychiatrists 
have been far too ready in this respect to abandon their belief in the connect- 
edness of psychical processes. I know for a fact that trains of thought without 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] It was not until later that my attention was drawn to the 
fact that Eduard von Hartmann takes the same view on this important matter 
of psychology: ‘In discussing the part played by the unconscious in artistic cre- 
ation, Eduard von Hartmann (1890, 1, Section B, Chapter V) made a clear 
statement of the law in accordance with which the association of ideas is gov- 
erned by unconscious purposive ideas, though he was unaware of the scope of 
the law. He set out to prove that “every combination of sensuous presentations, 
when it is not left purely to chance, but is led to a definite end, requires the help 
of the Unconscious” [ibid., 1, 245; English translation, 1884, 1, 283], and that 
the part played by conscious interest is to stimulate the unconscious to select the 
most appropriate idea among the countless possible ones. It is the unconscious 
which makes the appropriate selection of a purpose for the interest and this 
“holds good of the association of ideas in abstract thinking as well as in sensuous 
imagining and artistic combination” and in the production of jokes [ibid., 1, 
247; English translation, 1, 285 £]. For this reason a limitation of the association 
of ideas to an exciting idea and an excited idea (in the sense of a pure association 
psychology) cannot be upheld. Such a limitation could be justified “only if there 
are conditions in human life in which man is free not only from every conscious 
purpose, but also from the sway or co-operation of every unconscious interest, 
every passing mood. This is, however, a condition hardly ever occurring, for 
even if one in appearance completely abandons his train of thought to accident, 




532 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


purposive ideas no more occur in hysteria and paranoia than they do in the 
formation or resolution of dreams. It may be that they do not occur in any 
of the endogenous psychical disorders. Even the deliria of confusional states 
may have a meaning, if we are to accept Leuret’s brilliant suggestion [ 1 834, 
131] that they are only unintelligible to us owing to the gaps in them. I my- 
self have formed the same opinion when I have had the opportunity of ob- 
serving them. Deliria are the work of a censorship which no longer takes 
the trouble to conceal its operation; instead of collaborating in producing 
a new version that shall be unobjectionable, it ruthlessly deletes whatever 
it disapproves of, so that what remains becomes quite disconnected. This 
censorship acts exactly like the censorship of newspapers at the Russian 
frontier, which allows foreign journals to fall into the hands of the readers 
whom it is its business to protect only after a quantity of passages have been 
blacked out. 

It may be that free play of ideas with a fortuitous chain of associations 
is to be found in destructive organic cerebral processes; what is regarded 
as such in the psychoneuroses can always be explained as an effect of the 
censorship’s influence upon a train of thought which has been pushed 
into the foreground by purposive ideas that have remained hidden. 1 It has 
been regarded as an unfailing sign of an association being uninfluenced 
by purposive ideas if the associations (or images) in question seem to be 
interrelated, in what is described as a ‘superficial’ manner — by assonance, 
verbal ambiguity, temporal coincidence without connection in meaning, 


or if one abandons oneself entirely to the involuntary dreams of fancy, yet always 
other leading interests, dominant feelings and moods prevail at one time rather 
than at another, and these will always exert an influence on the association of 
ideas.” [Ibid., 1, 246; English translation, 1, 284.] “In semi-conscious dreams 
always only such ideas as correspond to the main [unconscious] interest of the 
moment occur.” [Loc. cit.] The emphasis thus laid upon the influence of feelings 
and moods on the free sequence of thoughts makes it possible to justify the 
methodological procedure of psycho-analysis completely from the standpoint of 
Hartmann’s psychology.’ (Pohorilles, 1913.) — Du Prel (1885, 107) refers to the 
fact that after we have vainly tried to recall a name, it often comes into our heads 
again suddenly and without any warning. He concludes from this that uncon- 
scious but none the less purposeful thinking has taken place and that its result 
has suddenly entered consciousness. 

1 [ Footnote added 1909:] This assertion has received striking confirmation from 
C. G. Jung’s analyses in cases of dementia praecox. (Jung, 1907.) 




A. The Forgetting of Dreams 


533 


or by any association of the kind that we allow in jokes or in play upon 
words. This characteristic is present in the chains of thought which lead 
from the elements of a dream to the intermediate thoughts and from 
these to the dream-thoughts proper; we have seen instances of this — not 
without astonishment — in many dream analyses. No connection was too 
loose, no joke too bad, to serve as a bridge from one thought to another. 
But the true explanation of this easy-going state of things is soon found. 
Whenever one psychical element is linked with another by an objectionable or 
superficial association, there is also a legitimate and deeper link between them 
which is subjected to the resistance of the censorship . 1 

The real reason for the prevalence of superficial associations is not the 
abandonment of purposive ideas but the pressure of the censorship. Super- 
ficial associations replace deep ones if the censorship makes the normal 
connecting paths impassable. We may picture, by way of analogy, a moun- 
tain region, where some general interruption of traffic (owing to floods, 
for instance) has blocked the main, major roads, but where communica- 
tions are still maintained over inconvenient and steep footpaths normally 
used only by the hunter. 

Two cases may here be distinguished, though in essence they are the 
same. In the first of these, the censorship is directed only against the con- 
nection between two thoughts, which are unobjectionable separately. If so, 
the two thoughts will enter consciousness in succession; the connection be- 
tween them will remain concealed, but, instead, a superficial link between 
them will occur to us, of which we should otherwise never have thought. 
This link is usually attached to some part of the complex of ideas quite 
other than that on which the suppressed and essential connection is based. 
The second case is where the two thoughts are in themselves subject to cen- 
sorship on account of their content. If so, neither of them appears in its true 
shape but only in a modified one which replaces it; and the two replacing 
thoughts are chosen in such a way that they have a superficial association 
that repeats the essential connection which relates the two thoughts that 
have been replaced. In both these cases the pressure of the censorship has resulted 
in a displacement from a normal and serious association to a superficial and ap- 
parently absurd one. 


1 [Everywhere else in this work Freud speaks of ‘the censorship of the resistance.’ A 
later clarification of the relation between the concepts of ‘resistance’ and ‘censor- 
ship’ will be found in Lecture XXIX of the New Introductory Lectures (1933<z).] 




534 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


Since we are aware that displacements of this kind occur, we have no 
hesitation when we are interpreting dreams in relying upon superficial as- 
sociations as much as upon others. 1 

In the psycho-analysis of neuroses the fullest use is made of these two 
theorems — that, when conscious purposive ideas are abandoned, concealed 
purposive ideas assume control of the current of ideas, and that superficial 
associations are only substitutes by displacement for suppressed deeper ones. 
Indeed, these theorems have become basic pillars of psycho-analytic tech- 
nique. When I instruct a patient to abandon reflection of any kind and to 
tell me whatever comes into his head, I am relying firmly on the presump- 
tion that he will not be able to abandon the purposive ideas inherent in the 
treatment and I feel justified in inferring that what seem to be the most in- 
nocent and arbitrary things which he tells me are in fact related to his illness. 
There is another purposive idea of which the patient has no suspicion — one 
relating to myself. The full estimate of the importance of these two theo- 
rems, as well as more detailed information about them, fall within the prov- 
ince of an account of the technique of psycho-analysis. Here, then, we have 
reached one of the frontier posts at which, in accordance with our pro- 
gramme, we must drop the subject of dream-interpretation. 2 

There is one true conclusion that we may glean from these objections, 
namely that we need not suppose that every association that occurs dur- 

1 The same considerations apply equally, of course, to cases in which the superfi- 
cial associations appear openly in the content of the dream, as, for instance, in 
the two dreams of Maury’s quoted above on pp. 87-8. ( Pelerinage — Pelletier — 
pelle; kilometre — kilogramme — Gilolo — Lobelia — Lopez — lotto.) My work with 
neurotic patients has taught me the nature of the memories of which this is a 
favourite method of representation. They are occasions on which the subject has 
turned over the pages of encyclopaedias or dictionaries in order (like most people 
at the inquisitive age of puberty) to satisfy their craving for an answer to the rid- 
dle of sex. — [An example of this will be found in the analysis of ‘Dora’s’ second 
dream (Freud, 1905e, Section III).] 

1 [ Footnote added 1909:] These two theorems, which sounded most unplausible at 
the time they were made, have since been experimentally employed and con- 
firmed by Jung and his pupils in their studies in word-association. [Jung, 1906. — 
A most interesting argument on the allied topic of the validity of chains of 
association starting from numbers selected ‘by chance’ (see above, pp. 518 f.) is 
developed by Freud in the long footnote added in 1920 to Chapter XII (A, No. 
7) of The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901 b).] 




B. Regression 


535 


ing the work of interpretation had a place in the dream-work during the 
night. [C£ pp. 298 and 327] It is true that in carrying out the interpreta- 
tion in the waking state we follow a path which leads back from the 
elements of the dream to the dream-thoughts and that the dream-work 
followed one in the contrary direction. But it is highly improbable that 
these paths are passable both ways. It appears, rather, that in the daytime 
we drive shafts which follow along fresh chains of thought and that these 
shafts make contact with the intermediate thoughts and the dream- 
thoughts now at one point and now at another. We can see how in this 
manner fresh daytime material inserts itself into the interpretative chains. 
It is probable, too, that the increase in resistance that has set in since the 
night makes new and more devious detours necessary. The number and 
nature of the collaterals [see p. 298 n. 1] that we spin in this way during 
the day is of no psychological importance whatever, so long as they lead 
us to the dream-thoughts of which we are in search. 


(B) 

REGRESSION 

Having now repelled the objections that have been raised against us, 
or having at least indicated where our defensive weapons lie, we must no 
longer postpone the task of setting about the psychological investigations 
for which we have so long been arming ourselves. Let us summarize the 
principal findings of our enquiry so far as it has gone. Dreams are psychi- 
cal acts of as much significance as any others; their motive force is in every 
instance a wish seeking fulfilment; the fact of their not being recognizable 
as wishes and their many peculiarities and absurdities are due to the in- 
fluence of the psychical censorship to which they have been subjected 
during the process of their formation: apart from the necessity of evading 
this censorship, other factors which have contributed to their formation 
are a necessity for the condensation of their psychical material, a regard 
for the possibility of its being represented in sensory images and — though 
not invariably — a demand that the structure of the dream shall have a ra- 
tional and intelligible exterior. Each of these propositions opens a way to 
fresh psychological postulates and speculations; the mutual relation be- 
tween the wish which is the dream’s motive force and the four conditions 



536 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


to which the dream’s formation is subject, as well as the inter-relations 
between the latter, require to be investigated; and the place of dreams in 
the nexus of mental life has to be assigned. 

It was with a view to reminding us of the problems which have still to 
be solved that I opened the present chapter with an account of a dream. 
There was no difficulty in interpreting that dream — the dream of the 
burning child — even though its interpretation was not given fully in our 
sense. I raised the question of why the dreamer dreamt it at all instead of 
waking up, and recognized that one of his motives was a wish to represent 
his child as still alive. Our further discussions will show us that yet an- 
other wish also played a part. [See below, p. 570.] Thus it was in the first 
instance for the sake of fulfilling a wish that the process of thought during 
sleep was transformed into a dream. 

If we eliminate the wish-fulfilment, we shall see that only one feature 
is left to distinguish the two forms of psychical event. The dream-thought 
would have run: ‘I see a glare coming from the room where the dead body 
is lying. Perhaps a candle has fallen over and my child may be burning.’ 
The dream repeated these reflections unaltered, but it represented them 
in a situation which was actually present and which could be perceived 
through the senses like a waking experience. Here we have the most gen- 
eral and the most striking psychological characteristic of the process of 
dreaming: a thought, and as a rule a thought of something that is wished, 
is objectified in the dream, is represented as a scene, or, as it seems to us, 
is experienced. 

How, then, are we to explain this characteristic peculiarity of the 
dream-work, or, to put the question more modestly, how are we to find a 
place for it in the nexus of psychical processes? 

If we look into the matter more closely we shall observe that two almost 
independent features stand out as characteristic of the form taken by this 
dream. One is the fact that the thought is represented as an immediate sit- 
uation with the ‘perhaps’ omitted, and the other is the fact that the 
thought is transformed into visual images and speech. 

In this particular dream the change made in the thoughts by the conver- 
sion of the expectation expressed by them into the present tense may not 
seem particularly striking. This is because of what can only be described as 
the unusually subordinate part played in this dream by wish-fulfilment. 
Consider instead another one, in which the dream-wish was not detached 
from the waking thoughts that were carried over into sleep — for instance, 



B. Regression 


537 


the dream of Irma’s injection [pp. 131 ff.]. There the dream-thought that 
was represented was in the optative: ‘If only Otto were responsible for Irma’s 
illness!’ The dream repressed the optative and replaced it by a straightfor- 
ward present: ‘Yes, Otto is responsible for Irma’s illness.’ This, then, is the 
first of the transformations which is brought about in the dream-thoughts 
even by a distortionless dream. We need not linger long over this first pecu- 
liarity of dreams. We can deal with it by drawing attention to conscious 
phantasies — to day-dreams — which treat their ideational content in just the 
same manner. While Daudet’s Monsieur Joyeuse 1 was wandering, out of 
work, through the streets of Paris (though his daughters believed that he had 
a job and was sitting in an office), he was dreaming of developments that 
might bring him influential help and lead to his finding employment — and 
he was dreaming in the present tense. Thus dreams make use of the present 
tense in the same manner and by the same right as day-dreams. The present 
tense is the one in which wishes are represented as fulfilled. 

But dreams differ from day-dreams in their second characteristic: 
namely, in the fact of their ideational content being transformed from 
thoughts into sensory images, to which belief is attached and which appear 
to be experienced. I must add at once that not every dream exhibits this 
transformation from idea into sensory image. There are dreams which con- 
sist only of thoughts but which cannot on that account be denied the es- 
sential nature of dreams. My ‘Autodidasker’ dream [pp. 315 ff.] was of that 
kind; it included scarcely more sensory elements than if I had thought its 
content in the daytime. And in every dream of any considerable length 
there are elements which have not, like the rest, been given a sensory form, 
but which are simply thought or known, in the kind of way in which we 
are accustomed to think or know things in waking life. It should also be re- 
membered here that it is not only in dreams that such transformations of 
ideas into sensory images occur: they are also found in hallucinations and 
visions, which may appear as independent entities, so to say, in health or 
as symptoms in the psychoneuroses. In short, the relation which we are ex- 
amining now is not in any respect an exclusive one. Nevertheless it remains 
true that this characteristic of dreams, when it is present, strikes us as being 
their most notable one; so that it would be impossible for us to imagine the 


1 [In Le Nabab (cf. p. 496). A slip made by Freud over this name in his first draft of 
this sentence is discussed by him in his Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901 b). 
Chapter VII, towards the end of Section A.] 




538 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 

dream-world without it. But in order to arrive at an understanding of it we 
must embark upon a discussion that will take us far afield. 

As the starting point for our enquiry, I should like to pick out one 
from among many remarks made upon the theory of dreaming by those 
who have written on the subject. In the course of a short discussion on 
the topic of dreams, the great Fechner (1889, 2, 520-1) puts forward the 
idea that the scene of action of dreams is different from that of ivaking 
ideational life. [Cf. above, p. 78.] This is the only hypothesis that makes 
the special peculiarities of dream-life intelligible. 1 

What is presented to us in these words is the idea of psychical locality. I 
shall entirely disregard the fact that the mental apparatus with which we 
are here concerned is also known to us in the form of an anatomical prepa- 
ration, and I shall carefully avoid the temptation to determine psychical 
locality in any anatomical fashion. I shall remain upon psychological 
ground, and I propose simply to follow the suggestion that we should pic- 
ture the instrument which carries out our mental functions as resembling 
a compound microscope or a photographic apparatus, or something of the 
kind. On that basis, psychical locality will correspond to a point inside the 
apparatus at which one of the preliminary stages of an image comes into 
being. In the microscope and telescope, as we know, these occur in part at 
ideal points, regions in which no tangible component of the apparatus is 
situated. I see no necessity to apologize for the imperfections of this or of 
any similar imagery. Analogies of this kind are only intended to assist us 
in our attempt to make the complications of mental functioning intelligi- 
ble by dissecting the function and assigning its different constituents to 
different component parts of the apparatus. So far as I know, the experi- 
ment has not hitherto been made of using this method of dissection in or- 
der to investigate the way in which the mental instrument is put together, 
and I can see no harm in it. We are justified, in my view, in giving free rein 
to our speculations so long as we retain the coolness of our judgement and 
do not mistake the scaffolding for the building. And since at our first ap- 
proach to something unknown all that we need is the assistance of provi- 
sional ideas, I shall give preference in the first instance to hypotheses of the 
crudest and most concrete description. 


1 [In a letter to Fliess of February 9, 1898 (Freud, 1950 a. Letter 83), Freud writes 
that this passage in Fechner is the only sensible remark he has found in the liter- 
ature on dreams.] 




B. Regression 


539 


Accordingly, we will picture the mental apparatus as a compound instru- 
ment, to the components of which we will give the name of ‘agencies,’ 1 or 
(for the sake of greater clarity) ‘systems.’ It is to be anticipated, in the next 
place, that these systems may perhaps stand in a regular spatial relation to 
one another, in the same kind of way in which the various systems of lenses 
in a telescope are arranged behind one another. Strictly speaking, there is 
no need for the hypothesis that the psychical systems are actually arranged 
in a spatial order. It would be sufficient if a fixed order were established by 
the fact that in a given psychical process the excitation passes through the 
systems in a particular temporal sequence. In other processes the sequence 
may perhaps be a different one; that is a possibility that we shall leave open. 
For the sake of brevity we will in future speak of the components of the ap- 
paratus as ‘t|)-systems.’ 

The first thing that strikes us is that this apparatus, compounded of 
tp-systems, has a sense or direction. All our psychical activity starts from 
stimuli (whether internal or external) and ends in innervations. 2 Accord- 
ingly, we shall ascribe a sensory and a motor end to the apparatus. At the 
sensory end there lies a system which receives perceptions; at the motor 
end there lies another, which opens the gateway to motor activity. Psychi- 
cal processes advance in general from the perceptual end to the motor 
end. Thus the most general schematic picture of the psychical apparatus 
may be represented thus (Fig. 1): 



Fig. 1 


1 [ ‘Instanzen,’ literally ‘instances,’ in a sense similar to that in which the word oc- 
curs in the phrase ‘a Court of First Instance.’] 

2 [‘Innervation’ is a highly ambiguous term. It is very frequently used in a structural 
sense, to mean the anatomical distribution of nerves in some organism or bodily 
region. Freud uses it more often (though not invariably) to mean the transmission 
of energy into a system of nerves, or (as in the present instance) specifically into an 
efferent system — to indicate, that is to say, a process tending towards discharge.] 




540 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


This, however, does no more than fulfil a requirement with which we 
have long been familiar, namely that the psychical apparatus must be con- 
structed like a reflex apparatus. Reflex processes remain the model of 
every psychical function. 

Next, we have grounds for introducing a first differentiation at the sen- 
sory end. A trace is left in our psychical apparatus of the perceptions which 
impinge upon it. This we may describe as a ‘memory-trace’; and to the 
function relating to it we give the name of ‘memory.’ If we are in earnest 
over our plan of attaching psychical processes to systems, memory-traces 
can only consist in permanent modifications of the elements of the sys- 
tems. But, as has already been pointed out elsewhere, 1 there are obvious 
difficulties involved in supposing that one and the same system can accu- 
rately retain modifications of its elements and yet remain perpetually open 
to the reception of fresh occasions for modification. In accordance, there- 
fore, with the principle which governs our experiment, we shall distribute 
these two functions on to different systems. We shall suppose that a system 
in the very front of the apparatus receives the perceptual stimuli but retains 
no trace of them and thus has no memory, while behind it there lies a sec- 
ond system which transforms the momentary excitations of the first sys- 
tem into permanent traces. The schematic picture of our psychical 
apparatus would then be as follows (Fig. 2): 



Fig. 2 


It is a familiar fact that we retain permanently something more than 
the mere content of the perceptions which impinge upon the system Pcpt. 
Our perceptions are linked with one another in our memory — first and 


1 [By Breuer in a footnote to Section I of his theoretical contribution to Breuer 
and Freud, 1895, where, among other things, he writes: ‘The mirror of a reflect- 
ing telescope cannot at the same time be a photographic plate.’] 





B. Regression 


541 


foremost according to simultaneity of occurrence. We speak of this fact 
as ‘association.’ It is clear, then, that, if the Pcpt. system has no memory 
whatever, it cannot retain any associative traces; the separate Pcpt. ele- 
ments would be intolerably obstructed in performing their function if the 
remnant of an earlier connection were to exercise an influence upon a 
fresh perception. We must therefore assume the basis of association lies in 
the mnemic systems. Association would thus consist in the fact that, as a 
result of a diminution in resistances and of the laying down of facilitating 
paths, an excitation is transmitted from a given Mnem. element more 
readily to one Mnem. element than to another. 

Closer consideration will show the necessity for supposing the exis- 
tence not of one but of several such Mnem. elements, in which one and 
the same excitation, transmitted by the Pcpt. elements, leaves a variety of 
different permanent records. The first of these Mnem. systems will natu- 
rally contain the record of association in respect to simultaneity in time; 
while the same perceptual material will be arranged in the later systems 
in respect to other kinds of coincidence, so that one of these later systems, 
for instance, will record relations of similarity, and so on with the others. 
It would of course be a waste of time to try to put the psychical signifi- 
cance of a system of this kind into words. Its character would lie in the 
intimate details of its relations to the different elements of the raw mate- 
rial of memory, that is — if we may hint at a theory of a more radical 
kind — in the degrees of conductive resistance which it offered to the pas- 
sage of excitation from those elements. 

At this point I will interpolate a remark of a general nature which may 
perhaps have important implications. It is the Pcpt. system, which is with- 
out the capacity to retain modifications and is thus without memory, that 
provides our consciousness with the whole multiplicity of sensory quali- 
ties. On the other hand, our memories — not excepting those which are 
most deeply stamped on our minds — are in themselves unconscious. 
They can be made conscious; but there can be no doubt that they can 
produce all their effects while in an unconscious condition. What we de- 
scribe as our ‘character’ is based on the memory-traces of our impressions; 
and, moreover, the impressions which have had the greatest effect on 
us — those of our earliest youth — are precisely the ones which scarcely 
ever become conscious. But if memories become conscious once more, 
they exhibit no sensory quality or a very slight one in comparison with 
perceptions. A most promising light would be thrown on the conditions 
governing the excitation of neurones if it could be confirmed that in the 



542 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


-systems memory and the quality that characterizes consciousness are mutu- 
ally exclusive . 1 

The assumptions we have so far put forward as to the construction of 
the psychical apparatus at its sensory end have been made without refer- 
ence to dreams or to the psychological information that we have been able 
to infer from them. Evidence afforded by dreams will, however, help us to- 
wards understanding another portion of the apparatus. We have seen [see 
pp. 168 ff.] that we were only able to explain the formation of dreams by 
venturing upon the hypothesis of there being two psychical agencies, one 
of which submitted the activity of the other to a criticism which involved 
its exclusion from consciousness. The critical agency, we concluded, stands 
in a closer relation to consciousness than the agency criticized: it stands 
like a screen between the latter and consciousness. Further, we found rea- 
sons [p. 494] for identifying the critical agency with the agency which di- 
rects our waking life and determines our voluntary, conscious actions. If, 
in accordance with our assumptions, we replace these agencies by systems, 
then our last conclusion must lead us to locate the critical system at the 
motor end of the apparatus. We will now introduce the two systems into 
our schematic picture and give them names to express their relation to 
consciousness (Fig. 3). 

We will describe the last of the systems at the motor end as ‘the precon- 
scious,’ to indicate that the excitatory processes occurring in it can enter 
consciousness without further impediment provided that certain other 
conditions are fulfilled: for instance, that they reach a certain degree of in- 
tensity, that the function which can only be described as ‘attention’ is dis- 


1 [Footnote added 1925:] I have since suggested that consciousness actually arises in- 
stead o/the memory-trace. See my ‘Note upon the “Mystic Writing-Pad’” (1925a). 
[Cf. also Chapter IV of Beyond the Pleasure Principle ( 1 920^) , where the same 
point is made. — The whole of the present discussion on memory will be made 
more intelligible by a study of these two passages from Freud’s later writings. But 
still more light is thrown on it by some of his earlier reflections on the subject re- 
vealed in the Fliess correspondence (Freud, 1950a). See, for instance. Section 3 of 
Part I of the ‘Project for a Scientific Psychology’ (written in the autumn of 1895) 
and Letter 52 (written on December 6, 1896). This letter, incidentally, contains 
what is evidently an early version of the ‘schematic picture’ represented above as 
well as the first appearance of the abbreviations by which the various systems are 
here distinguished. The equivalent English symbols are self-explanatory: 'Cr.’for 
the ‘conscious’ system, ‘Pcs.’ for the ‘preconscious,’ ‘Ucs.’ for the ‘unconscious,’ 
Pcpt.’lot the ‘perceptual’ and ‘Mnem. ’for the ‘mnemic’ systems.] 




B. Regression 


543 



Fig. 3 


tributed in a particular way [see p. 590], and so on. This is at the same 
time the system which holds the key to voluntary movement. We will de- 
scribe the system that lies behind it as ‘the unconscious,’ because it has no 
access to consciousness except via the preconscious, in passing through 
which its excitatory process is obliged to submit to modifications. 1 

In which of these systems, then, are we to locate the impetus to the 
construction of dreams? For simplicity’s sake, in the system Ucs. It is true 
that in the course of our future discussion we shall learn that this is not en- 
tirely accurate, and that the process of forming dreams is obliged to attach 
itself to dream- thoughts belonging to the preconscious system [p. 562]. 
But when we consider the dream-wish, we shall find that the motive force 
for producing dreams is supplied by the Ucs. [p. 561]; and owing to this 
latter factor we shall take the unconscious system as the starting-point of 
dream-formation. Like all other thought-structures, this dream-instigator 
will make an effort to advance into the Pcs. and from there to obtain access 
to consciousness. 

Experience shows us that this path leading through the preconscious 
to consciousness is barred to the dream-thoughts during the daytime by 
the censorship imposed by resistance. During the night they are able to 
obtain access to consciousness; but the question arises as to how they do 


1 \Footnote added 1919:] If we attempted to proceed further with this schematic 
picture, in which the systems are set out in linear succession, we should have to 
reckon with the fact that the system next beyond the Pcs. is the one to which 
consciousness must be ascribed — in other words, that Pcpt. = Cs. [See below, pp. 
609 ff. For a fuller discussion of this see Freud, 1917 d. — Freud’s later ‘schematic 
picture’ of the mind, first given in The Ego and the Id (1923 b). Chapter II, and 
repeated (with some modifications) in the New Introductory Lectures (1933 d). 
Lecture XXXI, lays more stress on structure than on function.] 




544 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


so and thanks to what modification. If what enabled the dream-thoughts 
to achieve this were the fact that at night there is a lowering of the resis- 
tance which guards the frontier between the unconscious and the precon- 
scious, we should have dreams which were in the nature of ideas and 
which were without the hallucinatory quality in which we are at the mo- 
ment interested. Thus the lowering of the censorship between the two sys- 
tems Ucs. and Pcs. can only explain dreams formed like ‘Autodidasker’ and 
not dreams like that of the burning child which we took as the starting- 
point of our investigations. 

The only way in which we can describe what happens in hallucinatory 
dreams is by saying that the excitation moves in a backivard direction. In- 
stead of being transmitted towards the motor end of the apparatus it 
moves towards the sensory end and finally reaches the perceptual system. 
If we describe as ‘progressive’ the direction taken by psychical processes 
arising from the unconscious during waking life, then we may speak of 
dreams as having a ‘regressive’ character. 1 

This regression, then, is undoubtedly one of the psychological charac- 
teristics of the process of dreaming; but we must remember that it does 
not occur only in dreams. Intentional recollection and other constituent 
processes of our normal thinking involve a retrogressive movement in the 
psychical apparatus from a complex ideational act back to the raw mate- 
rial of the memory-traces underlying it. In the waking state, however, this 
backward movement never extends beyond the mnemic images; it does 
not succeed in producing a hallucinatory revival of the perceptual images. 
Why is it otherwise in dreams? When we were considering the work of 
condensation in dreams we were driven to suppose that the intensities at- 
taching to ideas can be completely transferred by the dream-work from 
one idea to another [p. 345]. It is probably this alteration in the normal 


1 [Footnote added 1914:] The first hint at the factor of regression is to be found as 
far back as in Albertus Magnus [the thirteenth century Scholastic writer]. The 
‘ imaginatio,’ he tells us, constructs dreams out of the stored-up images of sensory 
objects; and the process is carried out in a reverse direction to that in waking life. 
(Quoted by Diepgen, 1912, 14.) — Hobbes writes in the Leviathan (1651, Pt. I, 
Chapter 2): ‘In sum, our dreams are the reverse of our waking imaginations, the 
motion, when we are awake, beginning at one end, and when we dream at an- 
other.’ (Quoted by Havelock Ellis, 1911, 109.) — [Breuer, in Section I of Chap- 
ter III of Breuer and Freud, 1895, speaks (in connection with hallucinations) of 
‘a “regressive” excitation, emanating from the organ of memory, and acting 
upon the perceptual apparatus by means of ideas.’] 




B. Regression 


545 


psychical procedure which makes possible the cathexis of the system Pcpt. 
in the reverse direction, starting from thoughts, to the pitch of complete 
sensory vividness. 

We must not delude ourselves into exaggerating the importance of these 
considerations. We have done no more than give a name to an inexplicable 
phenomenon. We call it ‘regression’ when in a dream an idea is turned back 
into the sensory image from which it was originally derived. But even this 
step requires justification. What is the point of this nomenclature if it 
teaches us nothing new? I believe the name ‘regression’ is of help to us in so 
far as it connects a fact that was already known to us with our schematic 
picture, in which the mental apparatus was given a sense or direction. And 
it is at this point that that picture begins to repay us for having constructed 
it. For an examination of it, without any further reflection, reveals a further 
characteristic of dream-formation. If we regard the process of dreaming as 
a regression occurring in our hypothetical mental apparatus, we at once ar- 
rive at the explanation of the empirically established fact that all the logical 
relations belonging to the dream-thoughts disappear during the dream- 
activity or can only find expression with difficulty [p. 328], According to 
our schematic picture, these relations are contained not in the first Mnem. 
systems but in later ones; and in case of regression they would necessarily 
lose any means of expression except in perceptual images. In regression the 
fabric of the dream-thoughts is resolved into its raw material. 

What modification is it that renders possible a regression which cannot 
occur in daytime? We must be content with some conjectures on this 
point. No doubt it is a question of changes in the cathexes of energy at- 
taching to the different systems, changes which increase or diminish the 
facility with which those systems can be passed through by the excitatory 
process. But in any apparatus of this kind the same results upon the pas- 
sage of excitations might be produced in more than one way. Our first 
thoughts will of course be of the state of sleep and the changes in cathexis 
which it brings about at the sensory end of the apparatus. During the day 
there is a continuous current from the Pcpt. system flowing in the direc- 
tion of motor activity; but this current ceases at night and could no longer 
form an obstacle to a current of excitation flowing in the opposite sense. 
Here we seem to have the ‘shutting-out of the external world,’ which some 
authorities regard as the theoretical explanation of the psychological char- 
acteristics of dreams. (See pp. 80.) 

In explaining regression in dreams, however, we must bear in mind the 
regressions which also occur in pathological waking states; and here the 



546 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


explanation just given leaves us in the lurch. For in those cases regression oc- 
curs in spite of a sensory current flowing without interruption in a forward 
direction. My explanation of hallucinations in hysteria and paranoia and of 
visions in mentally normal subjects is that they are in fact regressions — that 
is, thoughts transformed into images — but that the only thoughts that un- 
dergo this transformation are those which are intimately linked with mem- 
ories that have been suppressed or have remained unconscious. 

For instance, one of my youngest hysterical patients, a twelve-year-old 
boy, was prevented from falling asleep by ‘green faces with red eyes which 
terrified him. The source of this phenomenon was a suppressed, though 
at one time conscious, memory of a boy whom he had often seen four 
years earlier. This boy had presented him with an alarming picture of the 
consequences of bad habits in children, including masturbation — a habit 
with which my patient was now reproaching himself in retrospect. His 
mother had pointed out at the time that the ill-behaved boy had a green- 
ish face and red (i.e. red-rimmed) eyes. Here was the origin of his bogey, 
whose only purpose, incidentally, was to remind him of another of his 
mother’s predictions — that boys of that sort grow into idiots, can learn 
nothing at school and die young. My little patient had fulfilled one part 
of the prophecy, for he was making no progress at his school, and, as was 
shown from his account of the involuntary thoughts that occurred to 
him, he was terrified of the other part. I may add that after a short time 
the treatment resulted in his being able to sleep, in his nervousness disap- 
pearing and his being awarded a mark of distinction at the end of his 
school-year. 

In the same connection I will give the explanation of a vision that was 
described to me by another hysterical patient (a woman of forty) as having 
happened before she fell ill. One morning she opened her eyes and saw her 
brother in the room, though, as she knew, he was in fact in an insane asy- 
lum. Her small son was sleeping in the bed beside her. To save the child 
from having a fright and falling into convulsions when he saw his uncle, she 
pulled the sheet over his face, whereupon the apparition vanished. This vi- 
sion was a modified version of a memory from the lady’s childhood; and, 
though it was conscious, it was intimately related to all the unconscious 
material in her mind. Her nurse had told her that her mother (who had 
died very young, when my patient was only eighteen months old) had suf- 
fered from epileptic or hysterical convulsions, which went back to a fright 
caused by her brother (my patient’s uncle) appearing to her disguised as a 
ghost with a sheet over his head. Thus the vision contained the same ele- 



B. Regression 


547 


ments as the memory: the brother’s appearance, the sheet, the fright and 
its results. But the elements had been arranged in a different context and 
transferred on to other figures. The obvious motive of the vision, or of the 
thoughts which it replaced, was her concern lest her little boy might follow 
in the footsteps of his uncle, whom he greatly resembled physically. 

The two instances that I have quoted are neither of them entirely de- 
void of connection with the state of sleep and for that reason are perhaps 
not well chosen for what I want them to prove. I will therefore refer the 
reader to my analysis of a woman suffering from hallucinatory paranoia 
(Freud, 189 6b [Part III]) as well as to the findings in my still unpublished 
studies on the psychology of the psychoneuroses, 1 for evidence that in 
such instances of the regressive transformation of thoughts we must not 
overlook the influence of memories, most from childhood, which have 
been suppressed or have remained unconscious. The thoughts which are 
connected with a memory of this kind and which are forbidden expres- 
sion by the censorship are, as it were, attracted by the memory into re- 
gression as being the form of representation in which the memory itself 
is couched. I may also recall that one of the facts arrived at in the Studies 
on Hysteria [Breuer and Freud, 1895 — e.g. in Breuer’s first case history] 
was that when it was possible to bring infantile scenes (whether they were 
memories or phantasies) into consciousness, they were seen like halluci- 
nations and lost that characteristic only in the process of being reported. 
It is moreover a familiar observation that, even in those whose memory is 
not normally of a visual type, the earliest recollections of childhood retain 
far into life the quality of sensory vividness. 

If we now bear in mind how great a part is played in the dream-thoughts 
by infantile experiences or by phantasies based upon them, how frequently 
portions of them re-emerge in the dream-content and how often the 
dream-wishes themselves are derived from them, we cannot dismiss the 
probability that in dreams too the transformation of thoughts into visual 
images may be in part the result of the attraction which memories couched 
in visual form and eager for revival bring to bear upon thoughts cut off 
from consciousness and struggling to find expression. On this view a dream 
might be described as a substitute for an infantile scene modified by being 
transferred on to a recent experience. The infantile scene is unable to bring 
about its own revival and has to be content with returning as a dream. 


1 [Never published under any such title.] 




548 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 

This indication of the way in which infantile scenes (or their repro- 
ductions as phantasies) function in a sense as models for the content of 
dreams, removes the necessity for one of the hypotheses put forward by 
Schemer and his followers in regard to internal sources of stimulation. 
Schemer [1861] supposes that, when dreams exhibit particularly vivid or 
particularly copious visual elements, there is present a state of ‘visual stim- 
ulation,’ that is, of internal excitation in the organ of vision [cf. p. 247]. 
We need not dispute this hypothesis, but can content ourselves with as- 
suming that this state of excitation applies merely to the psychical percep- 
tual system of the visual organ; we may, however, further point out that 
the state of excitation has been set up by a memory, that it is a revival of a 
visual excitation which was originally an immediate one. I cannot pro- 
duce any good example from my own experience of an infantile memory 
producing this kind of result. My dreams are in general less rich in sen- 
sory elements than I am led to suppose is the case in other people. But in 
the case of my most vivid and beautiful dream of the last few years I was 
easily able to trace back the hallucinatory clarity of the dream’s content 
to the sensory qualities of recent or fairly recent impressions. On pp. 470 
ff. I recorded a dream in which the deep blue colour of the water, the 
brown of the smoke coming from the ship’s funnels, and the dark brown 
and red of the buildings left behind a profound impression on me. This 
dream, if any, should be traceable to a visual stimulus. What was it that 
had brought my visual organ into this state of stimulation? A recent im- 
pression, which attached itself to a number of earlier ones. The colours 
which I saw were in the first instance those of a box of toy bricks with 
which, on the day before the dream, my children had put up a fine build- 
ing and shown it off for my admiration. The big bricks were of the same 
dark red and the small ones were of the same blue and brown. This was 
associated with colour impressions from my last travels in Italy: the beau- 
tiful blue of the Isonzo and the lagoons and the brown of the Carso. 1 The 
beauty of the colours in the dream was only a repetition of something 
seen in my memory. 

Let us bring together what we have found out about the peculiar 
propensity of dreams to recast their ideational content into sensory images. 
We have not explained this feature of the dream-work, we have not traced 


1 [The limestone plateau behind Trieste.] 




B. Regression 


549 


it back to any known psychological laws; but we have rather picked it out 
as something that suggests unknown implications and we have character- 
ized it with the word ‘regressive.’ We have put forward the view that in all 
probability this regression, wherever it may occur, is an effect of a resis- 
tance opposing the progress of a thought into consciousness along the nor- 
mal path, and of a simultaneous attraction exercised upon the thought by 
the presence of memories possessing great sensory force. 1 In the case of 
dreams, regression may perhaps be further facilitated by the cessation of 
the progressive current which streams in during the daytime from the 
sense organs; in other forms of regression, the absence of this accessory fac- 
tor must be made up for by a greater intensity of the other motives for re- 
gression. Nor must we forget to observe that in these pathological cases of 
regression as well as in dreams the process of transference of energy must 
differ from what it is in regressions occurring in normal mental life, since 
in the former cases that process makes possible a complete hallucinatory 
cathexis of the perceptual systems. What we have described, in our analysis 
of the dream-work, as ‘regard for representability’ might be brought into 
connection with the selective attraction exercised by the visually recollected 
scenes touched upon by the dream-thoughts. 

It is further to be remarked 2 that regression plays a no less important part 
in the theory of the formation of neurotic symptoms than it does in that of 
dreams. Three kinds of regression are thus to be distinguished: ( a ) topo- 
graphical regression, in the sense of the schematic picture of the ^-systems 
which we have explained above; (h) temporal regression, in so far as what is 
in question is a harking back to older psychical structures; and ( c ) formal re- 
gression, where primitive methods of expression and representation take the 
place of the usual ones. All these three kinds of regression are, however, one 
at bottom and occur together as a rule; for what is older in time is more 
primitive in form and in psychical topography lies nearer to the perceptual 
end. [Cf. Freud, 191 7d] 


1 [Footnote added 1914:] In any account of the theory of repression it would have 
to be laid down that a thought becomes repressed as a result of the combined in- 
fluence upon it of two factors. It is pushed from the one side (by the censorship 
of the Cr.) and pulled from the other (by the Ucs.), in the same kind of way in 
which people are conveyed to the top of the Great Pyramid. [Added 1919:] Cf. 
[the opening pages of] my paper on repression (Freud, 1915 d). 

2 [This paragraph was added in 1914.] 




550 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


Nor can we leave the subject of regression in dreams 1 without setting 
down in words a notion by which we have already repeatedly been struck 
and which will recur with fresh intensity when we have entered more 
deeply into the study of the psychoneuroses: namely that dreaming is on 
the whole an example of regression to the dreamer’s earliest condition, a 
revival of his childhood, of the instinctual impulses which dominated it 
and of the methods of expression which were then available to him. Be- 
hind this childhood of the individual we are promised a picture of a phy- 
logenetic childhood — a picture of the development of the human race, of 
which the individual’s development is in fact an abbreviated recapitulation 
influenced by the chance circumstances of life. We can guess how much to 
the point is Nietzsche’s assertion that in dreams ‘some primaeval relic of 
humanity is at work which we can now scarcely reach any longer by a di- 
rect path’; and we may expect that the analysis of dreams will lead us to a 
knowledge of man’s archaic heritage, of what is psychically innate in him. 
Dreams and neuroses seem to have preserved more mental antiquities than 
we could have imagined possible; so that psycho-analysis may claim a high 
place among the sciences which are concerned with the reconstruction of 
the earliest and most obscure periods of the beginnings of the human race. 

It may well be that this first portion of our psychological study of 
dreams will leave us with a sense of dissatisfaction. But we can console 
ourselves with the thought that we have been obliged to build our way 
out into the dark. If we are not wholly in error, other lines of approach 
are bound to lead us into much the same region and the time may then 
come when we shall find ourselves more at home in it. 


(C) 

WISH-FULFILMENT 

The dream of the burning child at the beginning of this chapter gives 
us a welcome opportunity of considering the difficulties with which the 
theory of wish-fulfilment is faced. It will no doubt have surprised all of us 
to be told that dreams are nothing other than fulfilments of wishes, and 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1919.] 




C. Wish-Fulfilment 


551 


not only on account of the contradiction offered by anxiety-dreams. 
When analysis first revealed to us that a meaning and a psychical value lay 
concealed behind dreams, we were no doubt quite unprepared to find that 
that meaning was of such a uniform character. According to Aristotle’s ac- 
curate but bald definition, a dream is thinking that persists (in so far as 
we are asleep) in the state of sleep. [Cf. p. 37.] Since, then, our daytime 
thinking produces psychical acts of such various sorts — judgements, in- 
ferences, denials, expectations, intentions, and so on — why should it be 
obliged during the night to restrict itself to the production of wishes 
alone? Are there not, on the contrary, numerous dreams which show us 
psychical acts of other kinds — worries, for instance — transformed into 
dream-shape? And was not the dream with which we began this chapter 
(a quite particularly transparent one) precisely a dream of this sort? When 
the glare of light fell on the eyes of the sleeping father, he drew the worry- 
ing conclusion that a candle had fallen over and might have set the dead 
body on fire. He turned this conclusion into a dream by clothing it in a 
sensory situation and in the present tense. What part was played in this 
by wish-fulfilment? Can we fail to see in it the predominating influence 
of a thought persisting from waking life or stimulated by a new sense- 
impression? All this is quite true and compels us to enter more closely into 
the part played by wish-fulfilment in dreams and into the importance of 
waking thoughts which persist into sleep. 

We have already been led by wish-fulfilment itself to divide dreams into 
two groups. We have found some dreams which appeared openly as wish- 
fulfilments, and others in which the wish-fulfilment was unrecognizable 
and often disguised by every possible means. In the latter we have perceived 
the dream-censorship at work. We found the undistorted wishful dreams 
principally in children; though short, frankly wishful dreams seemed (and I 
lay emphasis upon this qualification) to occur in adults as well. 

We may next ask where the wishes that come true in dreams originate. 
What contrasting possibilities or what alternatives have we in mind in 
raising this question? It is the contrast, I think, between the consciously 
perceived life of daytime and a psychical activity which has remained un- 
conscious and of which we can only become aware at night. I can distin- 
guish three possible origins for such a wish. (1) It may have been aroused 
during the day and for external reasons may not have been satisfied; in that 
case an acknowledged wish which has not been dealt with is left over for 
the night. (2) It may have arisen during the day but been repudiated; in 



552 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


that case what is left over is a wish which has not been dealt with but has 
been suppressed. (3) It may have no connection with daytime life and be 
one of those wishes which only emerge from the suppressed part of the 
mind and become active in us at night. If we turn again to our schematic 
picture of the psychical apparatus, we shall localize wishes of the first kind 
in the system Pcs.; we shall suppose that wishes of the second kind have 
been driven out of the system Pcs. into the Ucs., where, if at all, they con- 
tinue to exist; and we shall conclude that wishful impulses of the third kind 
are altogether incapable of passing beyond the system Ucs. The question 
then arises whether wishes derived from these different sources are of equal 
importance for dreams and have equal power to instigate them. 

If we cast our minds over the dreams that are at our disposal for an- 
swering this question, we shall at once be reminded that we must add a 
fourth source of dream-wishes, namely the current wishful impulses that 
arise during the night (e.g. those stimulated by thirst or sexual needs). In 
the next place, we shall form the opinion that the place of origin of a 
dream-wish probably has no influence on its capacity for instigating 
dreams. I may recall the little girl’s dream which prolonged a trip on the 
lake that had been interrupted during the day and the other children’s 
dreams which I have recorded. [See pp. 152 ff.] They were explained as 
being due to unfulfilled, but unsuppressed, wishes from the previous day. 
Instances of a wish that has been suppressed in the daytime finding its way 
out in a dream are exceedingly numerous. I will add a further very simple 
example of this class. The dreamer was a lady who was rather fond of mak- 
ing fun of people and one of whose friends, a woman younger than herself, 
had just become engaged. All day long she had been asked by her acquain- 
tances whether she knew the young man and what she thought of him. 
She had replied with nothing but praises, with which she had silenced her 
real judgement; for she would have liked to tell the truth — that he was a 
‘Dutzendmensch’ [literally a ‘dozen man,’ a very commonplace sort of 
person — people like him are turned out by the dozen}. She dreamt that 
night that she was asked the same question, and replied with the formula: 
‘In the case of repeat orders it is sufficient to quote the number. ’ We have learnt, 
lastly, from numerous analyses that wherever a dream has undergone dis- 
tortion the wish has arisen from the unconscious and was one which could 
not be perceived during the day. Thus it seems at a first glance as though 
all wishes are of equal importance and equal power in dreams. 

I cannot offer any proof here that the truth is nevertheless otherwise; 
but I may say that I am strongly inclined to suppose that dream-wishes 



C. Wish-Fulfilment 


553 


are more strictly determined. It is true that children’s dreams prove be- 
yond a doubt that a wish that has not been dealt with during the day can 
act as a dream-instigator. But it must not be forgotten that it is a child’s 
wish, a wishful impulse of the strength proper to children. I think it is 
highly doubtful whether in the case of an adult a wish that has not been 
fulfilled during the day would be strong enough to produce a dream. It 
seems to me, on the contrary, that, with the progressive control exercised 
upon our instinctual life by our thought-activity, we are more and more 
inclined to renounce as unprofitable the formation or retention of such 
intense wishes as children know. It is possible that there are individual dif- 
ferences in this respect, and that some people retain an infantile type of 
mental process longer than others, just as there are similar differences in 
regard to the diminution of visual imagery, which is so vivid in early 
years. But in general, I think, a wish that has been left over unfulfilled 
from the previous day is insufficient to produce a dream in the case of an 
adult. I readily admit that a wishful impulse originating in the conscious 
will contribute to the instigation of a dream, but it will probably not do 
more than that. The dream would not materialize if the preconscious 
wish did not succeed in finding reinforcement from elsewhere. 

From the unconscious, in fact. My supposition is that a conscious wish 
can only become a dream-instigator if it succeeds in aivakeningan unconscious 
wish with the same tenor and in obtaining reinforcement from it. From indi- 
cations derived from the psycho-analysis of the neuroses, I consider that 
these unconscious wishes are always on the alert, ready at any time to find 
their way to expression when an opportunity arises for allying themselves 
with an impulse from the conscious and for transferring their own great 
intensity on to the latter’s lesser one . 1 It will then appear as though the 
conscious wish alone had been realized in the dream; only some small 


1 They share this character of indestructibility with all other mental acts which are 
truly unconscious, i.e. which belong to the system Ucs. only. These are paths 
which have been laid down once and for all, which never fall into disuse and 
which, whenever an unconscious excitation re-cathects them, are always ready to 
conduct the excitatory process to discharge. If I may use a simile, they are only 
capable of annihilation in the same sense as the ghosts in the underworld of the 
Odyssey — ghosts which awoke to new life as soon as they tasted blood. Processes 
which are dependent on the preconscious system are destructible in quite another 
sense. The psychotherapy of the neuroses is based on this distinction. [See below, 
p. 576.] 




554 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


peculiarity in the dream’s configuration will serve as a finger-post to put 
us on the track of the powerful ally from the unconscious. These wishes in 
our unconscious, ever on the alert and, so to say, immortal, remind one of 
the legendary Titans, weighed down since primaeval ages by the massive 
bulk of the mountains which were once hurled upon them by the victori- 
ous gods and which are still shaken from time to time by the convulsion 
of their limbs. But these wishes, held under repression, are themselves of 
infantile origin, as we are taught by psychological research into the neu- 
roses. I would propose, therefore, to set aside the assertion made just now 
[p. 552], that the place of origin of dream-wishes is a matter of indiffer- 
ence and replace it by another one to the following effect: a wish which is 
represented in a dream must be an infantile one. In the case of adults it orig- 
inates from the Ucs., in the case of children, where there is as yet no divi- 
sion or censorship between the Pcs. and the Ucs., or where that division is 
only gradually being set up, it is an unfulfilled, unrepressed wish from 
waking life. I am aware that this assertion cannot be proved to hold uni- 
versally; but it can be proved to hold frequently, even in unsuspected cases, 
and it cannot be contradicted as a general proposition. 

In my view, therefore, wishful impulses left over from conscious wak- 
ing life must be relegated to a secondary position in respect to the forma- 
tion of dreams. I cannot allow that, as contributors to the content of 
dreams, they play any other part than is played, for instance, by the ma- 
terial of sensations which become currently active during sleep. [See p. 
248.] I shall follow the same line of thought in now turning to consider 
those psychical instigations to dreaming, left over from waking life, which 
are other than wishes. When we decide to go to sleep, we may succeed in 
temporarily bringing to an end the cathexes of energy attaching to our 
waking thoughts. Anyone who can do this easily is a good sleeper; the 
first Napoleon seems to have been a model of this class. But we do not al- 
ways succeed in doing so, nor do we always succeed completely. Unsolved 
problems, tormenting worries, overwhelming impressions — all these 
carry thought-activity over into sleep and sustain mental processes in the 
system that we have named the preconscious. If we wish to classify the 
thought-impulses which persist in sleep, we may divide them into the fol- 
lowing groups: (1) what has not been carried to a conclusion during the 
day owing to some chance hindrance; (2) what has not been dealt with 
owing to the insufficiency of our intellectual power — what is unsolved; 
(3) what has been rejected and suppressed during the daytime. To these 



C. Wish-Fulfilment 


555 


we must add (4) a powerful group consisting of what has been set in ac- 
tion in our Ucs. by the activity of the preconscious in the course of the 
day; and finally (5) the group of daytime impressions which are indiffer- 
ent and have for that reason not been dealt with. 

There is no need to underestimate the importance of the psychical in- 
tensities which are introduced into the state of sleep by these residues of 
daytime life, and particularly of those in the group of unsolved problems. 
It is certain that these excitations continue to struggle for expression dur- 
ing the night; and we may assume with equal certainty that the state of 
sleep makes it impossible for the excitatory process to be pursued in the 
habitual manner in the preconscious and brought to an end by becoming 
conscious. In so far as our thought-processes are able to become conscious 
in the normal way at night, we are simply not asleep. I am unable to say 
what modification in the system Pcs. is brought about by the state of 
sleep; 1 but there can be no doubt that the psychological characteristics 
of sleep are to be looked for essentially in modifications in the cathexis of 
this particular system — a system that is also in control of access to the 
power of movement, which is paralysed during sleep. On the other hand, 
nothing in the psychology of dreams gives me reason to suppose that 
sleep produces any modifications other than secondary ones in the state 
of things prevailing in the Ucs. No other course, then, lies open to excita- 
tions occurring at night in the Pcs. than that followed by wishful exci- 
tations arising from the Ucs.; the preconscious excitations must find 
reinforcement from the Ucs. and must accompany the unconscious exci- 
tations along their circuitous paths. But what is the relation of the pre- 
conscious residues of the previous day to dreams? There is no doubt that 
they find their way into dreams in great quantity, and that they make use 
of the content of dreams in order to penetrate into consciousness even 
during the night. Indeed they occasionally dominate the content of a 
dream and force it to carry on the activity of daytime. It is certain, too, 
that the day’s residues may be of any other character just as easily as 
wishes; but it is highly instructive in this connection, and of positively de- 
cisive importance for the theory of wish-fulfilment, to observe the condi- 
tion to which they must submit in order to be received into a dream. 


1 [ Footnote added 1919:] I have tried to penetrate further into an understanding 
of the state of things prevailing during sleep and of the determining conditions 
of hallucination in a paper entitled ‘A Metapsychological Supplement to the 
Theory of Dreams’ [Freud, 1917 d\. 




556 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


Let us take one of the dreams I have already recorded — for instance, the 
one in which my friend Otto appeared with the signs of Graves’ disease. 
(See pp. 286 ff.) I had been worried during the previous day by Otto’s 
looks; and, like everything else concerned with him, this worry affected me 
closely. And it pursued me, as I may assume, into my sleep. I was probably 
anxious to discover what could be wrong with him. This worry found ex- 
pression during the night in the dream 1 have described, the content of 
which was in the first place nonsensical and in the second place was in no 
respect the fulfilment of a wish. I then began to investigate the origin of 
this inappropriate expression of the worry I had felt during the day, and 
by means of analysis I found a connection through the fact of my having 
identified my friend with a certain Baron L. and myself with Professor R. 
There was only one explanation of my having been obliged to choose this 
particular substitute for my daytime thought. I must have been prepared 
at all times in my Ucs. to identify myself with Professor R., since by means 
of that identification one of the immortal wishes of childhood — the mega- 
lomaniac wish — was fulfilled. Ugly thoughts hostile to my friend, which 
were certain to be repudiated during the day, had seized the opportunity 
of slipping through with the wish and getting themselves represented in 
the dream; but my daytime worry had also found some sort of expression 
in the content of the dream by means of a substitute. [Cf. p. 284.] The 
daytime thought, which was not in itself a wish but on the contrary a 
worry, was obliged to find a connection in some way or other with an in- 
fantile wish which was now unconscious and suppressed, and which 
would enable it — suitably decocted, it is true — to ‘originate’ in conscious- 
ness. The more dominating was the worry, the more far-fetched a link 
could be established; there was no necessity for there being any connection 
whatever between the content of the wish and that of the worry, and in 
fact no such connection existed in our example. 

It may perhaps be useful 1 to continue our examination of the same ques- 
tion by considering how a dream behaves when the dream-thoughts present 
it with material which is the complete reverse of a wish-fulfilment — 
well- justified worries, painful reflections, distressing realizations. The many 
possible outcomes can be classed under the two following groups. (A) The 
dream-work may succeed in replacing all the distressing ideas by contrary 
ones and in suppressing the unpleasurable affects attaching to them. The re- 


1 [This paragraph and the two following ones were added in 1919.] 



C. Wish-Fulfilment 


557 


suit will be a straightforward dream of satisfaction, a palpable ‘wish- 
fulfilment,’ about which there seems no more to be said. (B) The distressing 
ideas may make their way, more or less modified but none the less quite rec- 
ognizable, into the manifest content of the dream. This is the case which 
raises doubts as to the validity of the wish theory of dreams and needs fur- 
ther investigation. Dreams of this sort with a distressing content may either 
be experienced with indifference, or they may be accompanied by the whole 
of the distressing affect which their ideational content seems to justify, or 
they may even lead to the development of anxiety and to awakening. 

Analysis is able to demonstrate that these unpleasurable dreams are 
wish-fulfilments no less than the rest. An unconscious and repressed wish, 
whose fulfilment the dreamer’s ego could not fail to experience as some- 
thing distressing, has seized the opportunity offered to it by the persisting 
cathexis of the distressing residues of the previous day; it has lent them its 
support and by that means rendered them capable of entering a dream. 
But whereas in Group A the unconscious wish coincided with the con- 
scious one, in Group B the gulf between the unconscious and the con- 
scious (between the repressed and the ego) is revealed and the situation in 
the fairy tale of the three wishes which were granted by the fairy to the 
husband and wife is realized. (See below, p. 579 n.) The satisfaction at the 
fulfilment of the repressed wish may turn out to be so great that it coun- 
terbalances the distressing feelings attaching to the day’s residues [cf. p. 
508]; in that cass the feeling-tone of the dream is indifferent, in spite of its 
being on the one hand the fulfilment of a wish and on the other the fulfil- 
ment of a fear. Or it may happen that the sleeping ego takes a still larger 
share in the constructing of the dream, that it reacts to the satisfying of the 
repressed wish with violent indignation and itself puts an end to the dream 
with an outburst of anxiety. Thus there is no difficulty in seeing that un- 
pleasurable dreams and anxiety-dreams are just as much wish-fulfilments 
in the sense of our theory as are straightforward dreams of satisfaction. 

Unpleasurable dreams may also be ‘punishment-dreams.’ [See pp. 479 
fifi] It must be admitted that their recognition means in a certain sense a 
new addition to the theory of dreams. What is fulfilled in them is equally 
an unconscious wish, namely a wish that the dreamer may be punished 
for a repressed and forbidden wishful impulse. To that extent dreams of 
this kind fall in with the condition that has been laid down here that the 
motive force for constructing a dream must be provided by a wish be- 
longing to the unconscious. A closer psychological analysis, however, 



558 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


shows how they differ from other wishful dreams. In the cases forming 
Group B the dream-constructing wish is an unconscious one and belongs 
to the repressed, while in punishment-dreams, though it is equally an un- 
conscious one, it must be reckoned as belonging not to the repressed but 
to the ‘ego.’ Thus punishment-dreams indicate the possibility that the 
ego may have a greater share than was supposed in the construction of 
dreams. The mechanism of dream-formation would in general be greatly 
clarified if instead of the opposition between ‘conscious’ and ‘uncon- 
scious’ we were to speak of that between the ‘ego’ and the ‘repressed.’ 
This cannot be done, however, without taking account of the processes 
underlying the psychoneuroses, and for that reason it has not been carried 
out in the present work. I will only add that punishment-dreams are not 
in general subject to the condition that the day’s residues shall be of a dis- 
tressing kind. On the contrary, they occur most easily where the opposite 
is the case — where the day’s residues are thoughts of a satisfying nature 
but the satisfaction which they express is a forbidden one. The only trace 
of these thoughts that appears in the manifest dream is their diametric 
opposite, just as in the case of dreams belonging to Group A. The essen- 
tial characteristic of punishment-dreams would thus be that in their case 
the dream-constructing wish is not an unconscious wish derived from the 
repressed (from the system Ucs.), but a punitive one reacting against it 
and belonging to the ego, though at the same time an unconscious (that 
is to say, preconscious) one. 1 

I will report a dream of my own 2 in order to illustrate what I have just 
said, and in particular the way in which the dream-work deals with a 
residue of distressing anticipations from the previous day. 

‘Indistinct beginning. I said to my ivife that I had a piece of neivs for her, 
something quite special. She was alarmed and refused to listen. I assured her 
that on the contrary it was something that she woidd be very glad to hear, and 
began to tell her that our son ’s officer’s mess had sent a sum of money (5000 


1 [ Footnote added 1930:] This would be the appropriate point for a reference to 
the ‘super-ego,’ one of the later findings of psychoanalysis. [Cf. p. 482, n. — A 
class of dreams which are an exception to the ‘wish-theory’ (those which occur 
in traumatic neuroses) is discussed in Chapter II of Beyond the Pleasure Principle 
( 1 920g) and in the last pages of Lecture XXIX in the New Introductory Lectures 
(1933 a).] 

2 [This paragraph and the two following ones were added as a footnote in 1919, 
and incorporated in the text in 1930.] 




C. Wish-Fulfilment 


559 


Kronen ?) . . . something about distinction . . . distribution. . . . Meamvhile / 
had gone with her into a small room, like a storeroom, to look for something. 
Suddenly I saw my son appear. He was not in uniform but in tight-fitting 
sports clothes ( like a seal?), with a little cap. He climbed up on to a basket that 
was standing beside a cupboard, as though he wanted to put something on the 
cupboard. I called out to him: no reply. It seemed to me that his face or fore- 
head ivas bandaged. He was adjusting something in his mouth, pushing some- 
thing into it. And his hair was flecked ivith grey. I thought: “Could he be as 
exhausted as all that? And has he got false teeth?” Before I could call out 
again I woke up, feeling no anxiety but with my heart beating rapidly. My 
bedside clock showed that it was two thirty.’ 

Once again it is impossible for me to present a complete analysis. I 
must restrict myself to bringing out a few salient points. Distressing an- 
ticipations from the previous day were what gave rise to the dream: we 
had once more been without news of our son at the front for over a week. 
It is easy to see that the content of the dream expressed a conviction that 
he had been wounded or killed. Energetic efforts were clearly being made 
at the beginning of the dream to replace the distressing thoughts by their 
contrary. I had some highly agreeable news to communicate — something 
about money being sent . . . distinction . . . distribution. (The sum of 
money was derived from an agreeable occurrence in my medical practice; 
it was an attempt at a complete diversion from the topic.) But these ef- 
forts failed. My wife suspected something dreadful and refused to listen 
to me. The disguises were too thin and references to what it was sought 
to repress pierced through them everywhere. If my son had been killed, 
his fellow-officers would send back his belongings and I should have to 
distribute what he left among his brothers and sisters and other people. 
A ‘distinction’ is often awarded to an officer who has fallen in battle. 
Thus the dream set about giving direct expression to what it had first 
sought to deny, though the inclination towards wish-fulfilment was still 
shown at work in the distortions. (The change of locality during the 
dream is no doubt to be understood as what Silberer [1912] has described 
as ‘threshold symbolism.’ [Cf. above, pp. 508.]) We cannot tell, it is true, 
what it was that provided the dream with the motive force for thus giving 
expression to my distressing thoughts. My son did not appear as someone 
‘falling’ but as someone ‘climbing.’ He had in fact been a keen moun- 
taineer. He was not in uniform but in sports clothes; this meant that the 
place of the accident that I now feared had been taken by an earlier, sport- 
ing one; for he had had a fall during a skiing expedition and broken his 



560 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


thigh. The way in which he was dressed, on the other hand, which made 
him look like a seal, at once recalled someone younger — our funny little 
grandson; while the grey hair reminded me of the latter’s father, our son- 
in-law, who had been hard hit by the war. What could this mean? . . . but 
I have said enough of it. — The locality in a store-closet and the cupboard 
from which he wanted to take something (‘on which he wanted to put 
something’ in the dream) — these allusions reminded me unmistakably of 
an accident of my own which I had brought on myself when I was be- 
tween two and three years old. 1 I had climbed up on to a stool in the 
store-closet to get something nice that was lying on a cupboard or table. 
The stool had tipped over and its corner had struck me behind my lower 
jaw; I might easily, 1 reflected, have knocked out all my teeth. The recol- 
lection was accompanied by an admonitory thought; ‘that serves you 
right’; and this seemed as though it was a hostile impulse aimed at the 
gallant soldier. Deeper analysis at last enabled me to discover what the 
concealed impulse was which might have found satisfaction in the 
dreaded accident to my son: it was the envy which is felt for the young 
by those who have grown old, but which they believe they have com- 
pletely stifled. And there can be no question that it was precisely the 
strength of the painful emotion which would have arisen if such a misfor- 
tune had really happened that caused that emotion to seek out a repressed 
wish-fulfilment of this kind in order to find some consolation. 2 

I am now in a position to give a precise account of the part played in 
dreams by the unconscious wish. I am ready to admit that there is a whole 
class of dreams the instigation to which arises principally or even exclu- 
sively from the residues of daytime life; and I think that even my wish 
that I might at long last become a Professor Extraordinarius might have 
allowed me to sleep through the night in peace if my worry over my 
friend’s health had not still persisted from the previous day (p. 207). But 
the worry alone could not have made a dream. The motive force which the 
dream required had to be provided by a wish; it was the business of the 
worry to get hold of a wish to act as the motive force of the dream. 

The position may be explained by an analogy. A daytime thought may 
very well play the part of entrepreneur for a dream; but the entrepreneur, 


1 [Cf. p. 50, footnote.] 

2 [This dream is discussed briefly in its possible telepathic aspect at the beginning 
of Freud’s paper on ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (1922a).] 




C. Wish-Fulfilment 


561 


who, as people say, has the idea and the initiative to carry it out, can do 
nothing without capital; he needs a capitalist who can afford the outlay, 
and the capitalist who provides the psychical outlay for the dream is in- 
variably and indisputably, whatever may be the thoughts of the previous 
day, a wish from the unconscious . 1 

Sometimes the capitalist is himself the entrepreneur, and indeed in the 
case of dreams this is the commoner event: an unconscious wish is stirred 
up by daytime activity and proceeds to construct a dream. So, too, the 
other possible variations in the economic situation that I have taken as an 
analogy have their parallel in dream-processes. The entrepreneur may him- 
self make a small contribution to the capital; several entrepreneurs may ap- 
ply to the same capitalist; several capitalists may combine to put up what 
is necessary for the entrepreneur. In the same way, we come across dreams 
that are supported by more than one dream-wish; and so too with other 
similar variations, which could easily be run through, but which would be 
of no further interest to us. We must reserve until later what remains to 
be said of the dream-wish. 

The tertium comparationis [third element of comparison] in the analogy 
that I have just used — the quantity 2 put at the disposal of the entrepreneur 
in an appropriate amount — is capable of being applied in still greater detail 
to the purpose of elucidating the structure of dreams. In most dreams it is 
possible to detect a central point which is marked by peculiar sensory in- 
tensity, as I have shown on pp. 322 [and 345 £]. This central point is as a 
rule the direct representation of the wish-fulfilment, for, if we undo the dis- 
placements brought about by the dream-work, we find that the psychical in- 
tensity of the elements in the dream-thoughts has been replaced by the 
sensory intensity of the elements in the content of the actual dream. The 
elements in the neighbourhood of the wish-fulfilment often have nothing to 
do with its meaning, but turn out to be derivatives of distressing thoughts 
that run contrary to the wish. But owing to their being in what is often an 
artificially established connection with the central element, they have ac- 
quired enough intensity to become capable of being represented in the 
dream. Thus the wish-fulfilment’s power of bringing about representation 


1 [These last two paragraphs are quoted in full by Freud at the end of his analysis 
of Dora’s first dream (1905e, Part II), which, he comments, is a complete con- 
firmation of their correctness.] 

2 [Of capital in the case of the analogy, and of psychical energy in the case of a 
dream.] 




562 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


is diffused over a certain sphere surrounding it, within which all the 
elements — including even those possessing no means of their own — 
become empowered to obtain representation. In the case of dreams that are 
actuated by several wishes, it is easy to delimit the spheres of the different 
wish-fulfilments, and gaps in the dream may often be understood as fron- 
tier zones between those spheres. 1 

Though the preceding considerations have reduced the importance of 
the part played by the day’s residues in dreams, it is worth while devoting 
a little more attention to them. It must be that they are essential ingredi- 
ents in the formation of dreams, since experience has revealed the surpris- 
ing fact that in the content of every dream some link with a recent daytime 
impression — often of the most insignificant sort — is to be detected. We 
have not hitherto been able to explain the necessity for this addition to the 
mixture that constitutes a dream (see p. 203 £). And it is only possible to 
do so if we bear firmly in mind the part played by the unconscious wish 
and then seek for information from the psychology of the neuroses. We 
learn from the latter that an unconscious idea is as such quite incapable of 
entering the preconscious and that it can only exercise any effect there by 
establishing a connection with an idea which already belongs to the pre- 
conscious, by transferring its intensity on to it and by getting itself ‘cov- 
ered’ by it. Here we have the fact of ‘transference,’ 2 which provides an 
explanation of so many striking phenomena in the mental life of neurotics. 
The preconscious idea, which thus acquires an undeserved degree of in- 
tensity, may either be left unaltered by the transference, or it may have a 
modification forced upon it, derived from the content of the idea which 
effects the transference. I hope I may be forgiven for drawing analogies 


1 [A particularly clear summary of the part played by the 'day’s residues’ in the con- 
struction of dreams will be found in the course of Freud’s short paper, 1913a.] 

1 [In his later writings Freud regularly used this same word ‘transference’ (‘Uber- 
tragung) to describe a somewhat different, though not unrelated, psychological 
process, first discovered by him as occurring in the course of psycho-analytic 
treatment — namely, the process of ‘transferring’ on to a contemporary object 
feelings which originally applied, and still unconsciously apply, to an infantile 
object. (See, e.g., Freud, 1905e, Section IV; and Freud, 1915a.) The word occurs 
also in this other sense in the present volume — e.g. on pp. 207 and 221 — and 
had already been so used by Freud in the last pages of Chapter IV of Studies on 
Hysteria (Breuer and Freud, 1895).] 




C. Wish-Fulfilment 


563 


from everyday life, but I am tempted to say that the position of a repressed 
idea resembles that of an American dentist in this country: he is not al- 
lowed to set up in practice unless he can make use of a legally qualified 
medical practitioner to serve as a stalking-horse and to act as a ‘cover’ in 
the eyes of the law. And just as it is not exactly the physicians with the 
largest practices who form alliances of this kind with dentists, so in the 
same way preconscious or conscious ideas which have already attracted a 
sufficient amount of the attention that is operating in the preconscious 
will not be the ones to be chosen to act as covers for a repressed idea. The 
unconscious prefers to weave its connections round preconscious impres- 
sions and ideas which are either indifferent and have thus had no attention 
paid to them, or have been rejected and have thus had attention promptly 
withdrawn from them. It is a familiar article in the doctrine of associa- 
tions, and one that is entirely confirmed by experience, that an idea which 
is bound by a very intimate tie in one direction, tends, as it were, to repel 
whole groups of new ties. I once attempted to base a theory of hysterical 
paralyses on this proposition. 1 

If we assume that the same need for transference on the part of re- 
pressed ideas which we have discovered in analysing the neuroses is also 
at work in dreams, two of the riddles of the dream are solved at a blow: 
the fact, namely, that every analysis of a dream shows some recent impres- 
sion woven into its texture and that this recent element is often of the 
most trivial kind [p. 203] . I may add that (as we have already found else- 
where [p. 200]) the reason why these recent and indifferent elements so 
frequently find their way into dreams as substitutes for the most ancient 
of all the dream-thoughts is that they have least to fear from the censor- 
ship imposed by resistance. But while the fact that trivial elements are 
preferred is explained by their freedom from censorship, the fact that re- 
cent elements occur with such regularity points to the existence of a need 
for transference. Both groups of impressions satisfy the demand of the re- 
pressed for material that is still clear of associations — the indifferent ones 
because they have given no occasion for the formation of many ties, and 
the recent ones because they have not yet had time to form them. 

It will be seen, then, that the day’s residues, among which we may now 
class the indifferent impressions, not only borrow something from the Ucs. 
when they succeed in taking a share in the formation of a dream — namely 


1 [See Section IV of Freud, 1893c] 




564 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


the instinctual force which is at the disposal of the repressed wish — but 
that they also offer the unconscious something indispensable — namely the 
necessary point of attachment for a transference. If we wished to penetrate 
more deeply at this point into the processes of the mind, we should have 
to throw more light upon the interplay of excitations between the precon- 
scious and the unconscious — a subject towards which the study of the psy- 
choneuroses draws us, but upon which, as it happens, dreams have no help 
to offer. 

I have only one thing more to add about the day’s residues. There can 
be no doubt that it is they that are the true disturbers of sleep and not 
dreams, which, on the contrary are concerned to guard it. I shall return to 
this point later. [See pp. 5 76 ff.j 

We have so far been studying dream-wishes: we have traced them from 
their origin in the region of the Ucs. and have analysed their relations to 
the day’s residues, which in their turn may either be wishes or psychical 
impulses of some other kind or simply recent impressions. In this way we 
have allowed room for every claim that may be raised by any of the multi- 
farious waking thought-activities on behalf of the importance of the part 
played by them in the process of constructing dreams. It is not impossible, 
even, that our account may have provided an explanation of the extreme 
cases in which a dream, pursuing the activities of daytime, arrives at a 
happy solution of some unsolved problem of waking life. 1 All we need is 
an example of this kind, so that we might analyse it and trace the source 
of the infantile or repressed wishes whose help has been enlisted and has 
reinforced the efforts of preconscious activity with such success. But all 
this has not brought us a step nearer to solving the riddle of why it is that 
the unconscious has nothing else to offer during sleep but the motive 
forces for the fulfilment of a wish. The answer to this question must throw 
light upon the psychical nature of wishes, and I propose to give the answer 
by reference to our schematic picture of the psychical apparatus. 

There can be no doubt that that apparatus has only reached its present 
perfection after a long period of development. Let us attempt to carry it 
back to an earlier stage of its functioning capacity. Hypotheses, whose jus- 
tification must be looked for in other directions, tell us that at first the ap- 
paratus’s efforts were directed towards keeping itself so far as possible free 


1 [See above, pp. 93 f. An instance of this is mentioned in a footnote at the end of 
Section II of The Ego and the Id (Freud, 1923^).] 



C. Wish-Fulfilment 


565 


from stimuli ; 1 consequently its first structure followed the plan of a reflex 
apparatus, so that any sensory excitation impinging on it could be 
promptly discharged along a motor path. But the exigencies of life inter- 
fere with this simple function, and it is to them, too, that the apparatus 
owes the impetus to further development. The exigencies of life confront 
it first in the form of the major somatic needs. The excitations produced 
by internal needs seek discharge in movement, which may be described as 
an ‘internal change’ or an ‘expression of emotion.’ A hungry baby screams 
or kicks helplessly. But the situation remains unaltered, for the excitation 
arising from an internal need is not due to a force producing a momentary 
impact but to one which is in continuous operation. A change can only 
come about if in some way or other (in the case of the baby, through out- 
side help) an ‘experience of satisfaction’ can be achieved which puts an end 
to the internal stimulus. An essential component of this experience of sat- 
isfaction is a particular perception (that of nourishment, in our example) 
the mnemic image of which remains associated thenceforward with the 
memory trace of the excitation produced by the need. As a result of the 
link that has thus been established, next time this need arises a psychical 
impulse will at once emerge which will seek to re-cathect the mnemic im- 
age of the perception and to re-evoke the perception itself, that is to say, 
to re-establish the situation of the original satisfaction. An impulse of this 
kind is what we call a wish; the reappearance of the perception is the ful- 
filment of the wish; and the shortest path to the fulfilment of the wish is a 
path leading direct from the excitation produced by the need to a com- 
plete cathexis of the perception. Nothing prevents us from assuming that 
there was a primitive state of the psychical apparatus in which this path 
was actually traversed, that is, in which wishing ended in hallucinating. 
Thus the aim of this first psychical activity was to produce a ‘perceptual 
identity’ 2 — a repetition of the perception which was linked with the satis- 
faction of the need. 


1 [This is the so-called ‘Principle of Constancy’ which is discussed in the opening 
pages of Beyond the Pleasure Principle ( 1 920 g) . But it was already a fundamental 
assumption in some of Freud’s earliest psychological writings, e.g. in his post- 
humously published ‘Letter to Josef Breuer’ of June 29, 1892 (Freud, 1941<7). 
The whole gist of the present paragraph is already stated in Sections 1,2, 11 and 
16 of Part I of his ‘Project for a Scientific Psychology’ written in the autumn of 
1895 (Freud, 1950 a). Cf. Editor’s Introduction, pp. xiv ffi] 

2 [I.e. something perceptually identical with the ‘experience of satisfaction.’] 




566 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


The bitter experience of life must have changed this primitive thought- 
activity into a more expedient secondary one. The establishment of a per- 
ceptual identity along the short path of regression within the apparatus 
does not have the same result elsewhere in the mind as does the cathexis 
of the same perception from without. Satisfaction does not follow; the 
need persists. An internal cathexis could only have the same value as an ex- 
ternal one if it were maintained unceasingly, as in fact occurs in hallucina- 
tory psychoses and hunger phantasies, which exhaust their whole psychical 
activity in clinging to the object of their wish. In order to arrive at a more 
efficient expenditure of psychical force, it is necessary to bring the regres- 
sion to a halt before it becomes complete, so that it does not proceed be- 
yond the mnemic image, and is able to seek out other paths which lead 
eventually to the desired perceptual identity being established from the di- 
rection of the external world . 1 This inhibition of the regression and the 
subsequent division of the excitation become the business of a second sys- 
tem, which is in control of voluntary movement — which for the first time, 
that is, makes use of movement for purposes remembered in advance. But 
all the complicated thought-activity which is spun out from the mnemic 
image to the moment at which the perceptual identity is established by the 
external world — all this activity of thought merely constitutes a round- 
about path to wish-fulfilment which has been made necessary by experi- 
ence . 2 Thought is after all nothing but a substitute for a hallucinatory 
wish; and it is self-evident that dreams must be wish-fulfilments, since 
nothing but a wish can set our mental apparatus at work. Dreams, which 
fulfil their wishes along the short path of regression, have merely preserved 
for us in that respect a sample of the psychical apparatus’s primary method 
of working, a method which was abandoned as being inefficient. What 
once dominated waking life, while the mind was still young and incom- 
petent, seems now to have been banished into the night — just as the prim- 
itive weapons, the bows and arrows, that have been abandoned by adult 
men, turn up once more in the nursery. Dreaming is a piece of infantile 


1 [ Footnote added 1919:] In other words, it becomes evident that there must be a 
means of ‘reality-testing’ [i.e. of testing things to see whether they are real or not]. 

1 The wish-fulfilling activity of dreams is justly extolled by Le Lorrain, who speaks 
of it as ‘sans fatigue serieuse, sans etre oblige de recourir a cette lutte opiniatre et 
longue qui use et corrode les jouissances poursuivies [incurring no serious fatigue 
and not being obliged to embark upon the long and obstinate struggle that 
wears away and spoils enjoyments that have to be pursued.’] 




C. Wish-Fulfilment 


567 


mental life that has been superseded. These methods of working on the part 
of the psychical apparatus, which are normally suppressed in waking 
hours, become current once more in psychosis and then reveal their inca- 
pacity for satisfying our needs in relation to the external world . 1 

The unconscious wishful impulses clearly try to make themselves ef- 
fective in daytime as well, and the fact of transference, as well as the psy- 
choses, show us that they endeavour to force their way by way of the 
preconscious system into consciousness and to obtain control of the 
power of movement. Thus the censorship between the Ucs. and the Pcs., 
the assumption of whose existence is positively forced upon us by dreams, 
deserves to be recognized and respected as the watchman of our mental 
health. Must we not regard it, however, as an act of carelessness on the 
part of that watchman that it relaxes its activities during the night, allows 
the suppressed impulses in the Ucs. to find expression, and makes it pos- 
sible for hallucinatory regression to occur once more? I think not. For 
even though this critical watchman goes to rest — and we have proof that 
its slumbers are not deep — it also shuts the door upon the power of 
movement. — No matter what impulses from the normally inhibited Ucs. 
may prance upon the stage, we need feel no concern; they remain harm- 
less, since they are unable to set in motion the motor apparatus by which 
alone they might modify the external world. The state of sleep guarantees 
the security of the citadel that must be guarded. The position is less harm- 
less when what brings about the displacement of forces is not the nightly 
relaxation in the critical censorship’s output of force, but a pathological 
reduction in that force or a pathological intensification of the unconscious 
excitations while the preconscious is still cathected and the gateway to the 
power of movement stands open. When this is so, the watchman is over- 
powered, the unconscious excitations overwhelm the Pcs., and thence ob- 
tain control over our speech and actions; or they forcibly bring about 
hallucinatory regression and direct the course of the apparatus (which was 
not designed for their use) by virtue of the attraction exercised by percep- 
tions on the distribution of our psychical energy. To this state of things we 
give the name of psychosis. 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] I have elsewhere carried this train of thought further in a 
paper on the two principles of mental functioning (Freud, 1911 b ) — the pleasure 
principle and the reality principle, as I have proposed calling them. [The argu- 
ment is in fact developed further below, on pp. 594 ffi] 




568 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


We are now well on the way to proceeding further with the erection 
of the psychological scaffolding, which we stopped at the point at which 
we introduced the two systems Ucs. and Pcs. But there are reasons for 
continuing a little with our consideration of wishes as the sole psychical 
motive force for the construction of dreams. We have accepted the idea 
that the reason why dreams are invariably wish-fulfilments is that they are 
products of the system Ucs., whose activity knows no other aim than the 
fulfilment of wishes and which has at its command no other forces than 
wishful impulses. If we insist, for even a moment longer, upon our right 
to base such far-reaching psychological speculations upon the interpreta- 
tion of dreams, we are in duty bound to prove that those speculations 
have enabled us to insert dreams into a nexus which can include other 
psychical structures as well. If such a thing as a system Ucs. exists (or 
something analogous to it for the purposes of our discussion), dreams 
cannot be its only manifestation; every dream may be a wish-fulfilment, 
but apart from dreams there must be other forms of abnormal wish- 
fulfilments. And it is a fact that the theory governing all psychoneurotic 
symptoms culminates in a single proposition, which asserts that they too 
are to he regarded as fulfilments of unconscious wishes. 1 Our explanation 
makes the dream only the first member of a class which is of the greatest 
significance to psychiatrists and an understanding of which implies the 
solution of the purely psychological side of the problem of psychiatry . 1 2 

The other members of this class of wish-fulfilments — hysterical symp- 
toms, for instance — possess one essential characteristic, however, which I 
cannot discover in dreams. I have learnt from the researches which I have 
mentioned so often in the course of this work that in order to bring about 
the formation of a hysterical symptom both currents of our mind must 
converge. A symptom is not merely the expression of a realized uncon- 
scious wish; a wish from the preconscious which is fulfilled by the same 
symptom must also be present. So that the symptom will have at least two 
determinants, one arising from each of the systems involved in the con- 
flict. As in the case of dreams, there are no limits to the further determi- 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] Or more correctly, one portion of the symptom corre- 
sponds to the unconscious wish-fulfilment and another portion to the mental 
structure reacting against the wish. 

2 [ Footnote added 1914:] As Hughlings Jackson said: ‘Find out all about dreams 
and you will have found out all about insanity.’ [Quoted by Ernest Jones (1911), 
who had heard it at first hand from Hughlings Jackson.] 




C. Wish-Fulfilment 


569 


nants that may be present — to the ‘overdetermination’ of the symptoms. 1 
The determinant which does not arise from the Ucs. is invariably, so far 
as I know, a train of thought reacting against the unconscious wish — a 
self-punishment, for instance. 1 can therefore make the quite general as- 
sertion that a hysterical symptom develops only ivhere the fulfilments of two 
opposing wishes, arising each from a different psychical system, are able to con- 
verge in a single expression. (Compare in this connection my most recent 
formulations on the origin of hysterical symptoms in my paper on hys- 
terical phantasies and their relation to bisexuality. [Freud, 1908^.] 2 ) Ex- 
amples would serve very little purpose here, since nothing but an 
exhaustive elucidation of the complications involved could carry convic- 
tion. I will therefore leave my assertion to stand for itself and only quote 
an example in order to make the point clear, and not to carry conviction. 
In one of my women patients, then, hysterical vomiting turned out to be 
on the one hand the fulfilment of an unconscious phantasy dating from 
her puberty — of a wish, that is, that she might be continuously pregnant 
and have innumerable children, with a further wish, added later, that she 
might have them by as many men as possible. A powerful defensive im- 
pulse had sprung up against this unbridled wish. And, since the patient 
might lose her figure and her good looks as a result of her vomiting, and 
so might cease to be attractive to anyone, the symptom was acceptable to 
the punitive train of thought as well; and since it was permitted by both 
sides it could become a reality. This was the same method of treating a 
wish-fulfilment as was adopted by the Parthian queen towards the Roman 
triumvir Crassus. Believing that he had embarked on his expedition out 
of love of gold, she ordered molten gold to be poured down his throat 
when he was dead: ‘Now,’ she said, ‘you have what you wanted.’ But all 
that we so far know about dreams is that they express the fulfilment of a 
wish from the unconscious; it seems as though the dominant, precon- 
scious system acquiesces in this after insisting upon a certain number of 
distortions. Nor is it possible as a general rule to find a train of thought 
opposed to the dream-wish and, like its counterpart, realized in the 
dream. Only here and there in dream analyses do we come upon signs of 
reactive creations, like, for instance, my affectionate feelings for my friend 
R. in the dream of my uncle [with the yellow beard] (cf. pp. 174 f£). But 


1 [Cf. Freud in Breuer and Freud, 1895, Chapter IV, Section 1, Observation 3.] 

2 [This sentence was added in 1909.] 



570 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


we can find the missing ingredients from the preconscious elsewhere. 
Whereas the wish from the Ucs. is able to find expression in the dream af- 
ter undergoing distortions of every kind, the dominant system withdraws 
into a wish to sleep, realizes that wish by bringing about the modifications 
which it is able to produce in the cathexes within the psychical apparatus, 
and persists in that wish throughout the whole duration of sleep. 1 

This determined wish on the part of the preconscious to sleep exercises 
a generally facilitating effect on the formation of dreams. Let me recall the 
dream dreamt by the man who was led to infer from the glare of light com- 
ing out of the next room that his child’s body might be on fire [pp. 513 
ffi] . The father drew this inference in a dream instead of allowing himself 
to be woken up by the glare; and we have suggested that one of the psychi- 
cal forces responsible for this result was a wish which prolonged by that one 
moment the life of the child whom he pictured in the dream. Other 
wishes, originating from the repressed, probably escape us, since we are un- 
able to analyse the dream. But we may assume that a further motive force 
in the production of the dream was the father’s need to sleep; his sleep, like 
the child’s life, was prolonged by one moment by the dream. ‘Let the 
dream go on’ — such was his motive — ‘or I shall have to wake up.’ In every 
other dream, just as in this one, the wish to sleep lends its support to the 
unconscious wish. On pp. 1 50 f. I described some dreams which appeared 
openly as dreams of convenience. But in fact all dreams can claim a right 
to the same description. The operation of the wish to continue sleeping is 
most easily to be seen in arousal dreams, which modify external sensory 
stimuli in such a way as to make them compatible with a continuance of 
sleep; they weave them into a dream in order to deprive them of any pos- 
sibility of acting as reminders of the external world. That same wish must, 
however, play an equal part in allowing the occurrence of all other dreams, 
though it may only be from within that they threaten to shake the subject 
out of his sleep. In some cases, when a dream carries things too far, the Pcs. 
says to consciousness: ‘Never mind! go on sleeping! after all it’s only a 
dream!’ [See pp. 493 fi] But this describes in general the attitude of our 
dominant mental activity towards dreams, though it may not be openly ex- 
pressed. 1 am driven to conclude that throughout our whole sleeping state ive 


1 1 have borrowed this idea from the theory of sleep put forward by Liebeault 
(1889), to whom is due the revival in modern times of research into hypnotism. 



C. Wish-Fulfilment 


571 


know just as certainly that we are dreaming as we know that we are sleeping. 
We must not pay too much attention to the counter-argument that our 
consciousness is never brought to bear on the latter piece of knowledge and 
that it is only brought to bear on the former on particular occasions when 
the censorship feels that it has, as it were, been taken off its guard. 

On the other hand, 1 there are some people who are quite clearly aware 
during the night that they are asleep and dreaming and who thus seem to 
possess the faculty of consciously directing their dreams. If, for instance, a 
dreamer of this kind is dissatisfied with the turn taken by a dream, he can 
break it off without waking up and start it again in another direction — 
just as a popular dramatist may under pressure give his play a happier end- 
ing. Or another time, if his dream has led him into a sexually exciting 
situation, he can think to himself: ‘1 won’t go on with this dream any fur- 
ther and exhaust myself with an emission; I’ll hold it back for a real situa- 
tion instead.’ 

The Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denys [1867, 268 ff.], 2 quoted by 
Vaschide (1911, 139), claimed to have acquired the power of accelerating 
the course of his dreams just as he pleased, and of giving them any direc- 
tion he chose. It seems as though in his case the wish to sleep had given 
place to another preconscious wish, namely to observe his dreams and en- 
joy them. Sleep is just as compatible with a wish of this sort as it is with a 
mental reservation to wake up if some particular condition is fulfilled 
(e.g. in the case of a nursing mother or wet-nurse) [p. 244] . Moreover, it 
is a familiar fact that anyone who takes an interest in dreams remembers 
a considerably greater number of them after waking. 

Ferenczi (191 1), 3 in the course of a discussion of some other observa- 
tions upon the directing of dreams, remarks: ‘Dreams work over the 
thoughts which are occupying the mind at the moment from every angle; 
they will drop a dream-image if it threatens the success of a wish-fulfilment 
and will experiment with a fresh solution, till at last they succeed in con- 
structing a wish-fulfilment which satisfies both agencies of the mind as a 
compromise.’ 


1 [This paragraph was added in 1909.] 

2 [This paragraph was added in 1914.] 

3 [This paragraph was added as a footnote in 1914 and included in the text in 
1930.] 




572 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


(D) 

AROUSAL BY DREAMS— THE FUNCTION OF 
DREAMS— ANXIETY-DREAMS 

Now that we know that all through the night the preconscious is 
concentrated upon the wish to sleep, we are in a position to carry our un- 
derstanding of the process of dreaming a stage further. But first let us sum- 
marize what we have learnt so far. 

The situation is this. Either residues of the previous day have been left 
over from the activity of waking life and it has not been possible to with- 
draw the whole cathexis of energy from them; or the activity of waking life 
during the course of the day has led to the stirring up of an unconscious 
wish; or these two events have happened to coincide. (We have already dis- 
cussed the various possibilities in this connection.) The unconscious wish 
links itself up with the day’s residues and effects a transference on to them; 
this may happen either in the course of the day or not until a state of sleep 
has been established. A wish now arises which has been transferred on to 
the recent material; or a recent wish, having been suppressed, gains fresh 
life by being reinforced from the unconscious. This wish seeks to force its 
way along the normal path taken by thought-processes, through the Pcs. 
(to which, indeed, it in part belongs) to consciousness. But it comes up 
against the censorship, which is still functioning and to the influence of 
which it now submits. At this point it takes on the distortion for which 
the way has already been paved by the transference of the wish on to the 
recent material. So far it is on the way to becoming an obsessive idea or a 
delusion or something of the kind — that is, a thought which has been in- 
tensified by transference and distorted in its expression by censorship. Its 
further advance is halted, however, by the sleeping state of the precon- 
scious. (The probability is that that system has protected itself against the 
invasion by diminishing its own excitations.) The dream-process conse- 
quently enters on a regressive path, which lies open to it precisely owing 
to the peculiar nature of the state of sleep, and it is led along that path by 
the attraction exercised on it by groups of memories; some of these mem- 
ories themselves exist only in the form of visual cathexes and not as trans- 
lations into the terminology of the later systems. [Cf. p. 547.] In the 



D. The Function of Dreams 


573 


course of its regressive path the dream-process acquires the attribute of rep- 
resentability. (I shall deal later with the question of compression [p. 592].) 
It has now completed the second portion of its zigzag journey. The first 
portion was a progressive one, leading from the unconscious scenes or 
phantasies to the preconscious; the second portion led from the frontier of 
the censorship back again to perceptions. But when the content of the 
dream-process has become perceptual, by that fact it has, as it were, found 
a way of evading the obstacle put in its way by the censorship and the state 
of sleep in the Pcs. [Cf. p. 529.] It succeeds in drawing attention to itself 
and in being noticed by consciousness. 

For consciousness, which we look upon in the light of a sense organ 
for the apprehension of psychical qualities, is capable in waking life of re- 
ceiving excitations from two directions. In the first place, it can receive 
excitations from the periphery of the whole apparatus, the perceptual sys- 
tem; and in addition to this, it can receive excitations of pleasure and un- 
pleasure, which prove to be almost the only psychical quality attaching to 
transposition of energy in the inside of the apparatus. All other processes 
in the ip-systems, including the Pcs., are lacking in any psychical quality 
and so cannot be objects of consciousness, except in so far as they bring 
pleasure or unpleasure to perception. We are thus driven to conclude that 
these releases of pleasure and unpleasure automatically regidate the course of 
cathectic processes. But, in order to make more delicately adjusted perfor- 
mances possible, it later became necessary to make the course of ideas less 
dependent upon the presence or absence of unpleasure. For this purpose 
the Pcs. system needed to have qualities of its own which could attract 
consciousness; and it seems highly probably that it obtained them by 
linking the preconscious processes with the mnemic system of linguistic 
symbols, a system which was not without quality. [See p. 612.] By means 
of the qualities of that system, consciousness, which had hitherto been a 
sense organ for perceptions alone, also became a sense organ for a portion 
of our thought-processes. Now, therefore, there are, as it were, two sen- 
sory surfaces, one directed towards perception and the other towards the 
preconscious thought-processes. 

I must assume that the state of sleep makes the sensory surface of con- 
sciousness which is directed towards the Pcs. far more insusceptible to 
excitation than the surface directed towards the Pcpt. systems. Moreover, 
this abandonment of interest in thought-processes during the night has a 
purpose: thinking is to come to a standstill, for the Pcs. requires sleep. 
Once, however, a dream has become a perception, it is in a position to excite 



574 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 

consciousness, by means of the qualities it has now acquired. This sensory 
excitation proceeds to perform what is its essential function: it directs a part 
of the available cathectic energy in the Pcs. into attention to what is causing 
the excitation. [See p. 590.] It must therefore be admitted that every dream 
has an arousing effect, that it sets a part of the quiescent force of the Pcs. in 
action. The dream is then submitted by this force to the influence which 
we have described as secondary revision with an eye to consecutiveness and 
intelligibility. That is to say, the dream is treated by it just like any other 
perceptual content; it is met by the same anticipatory ideas, in so far as its 
subject-matter allows [p. 503]. So far as this third portion of the dream- 
process has any direction it is once again a progressive one. 

To avoid misunderstandings, a word about the chronological relations 
of these dream-processes will not be out of place. A very attractive conjec- 
ture has been put forward by Goblot [1896, 289 £], suggested, no doubt, 
by the riddle of Maury’s guillotine dream [p. 58 £]. He seeks to show that 
a dream occupies no more than the transition period between sleeping and 
waking. The process of awakening takes a certain amount of time, and 
during that time the dream occurs. We imagine that the final dream-image 
was so powerful that it compelled us to wake; whereas in fact it was only 
so powerful because at that moment we were already on the point of wak- 
ing. ‘Un reve c’est un reveil qui commence.’ 1 

It has already been pointed out by Dugas [1879 b\ that Goblot would 
have to disregard many facts before he could assert his thesis generally. 
Dreams occur from which we do not awaken — for instance, some in which 
we dream that we are dreaming. With our knowledge of the dream-work, 
we could not possibly agree that it only covers the period of awakening. It 
seems probable, on the contrary, that the first portion of the dream-work 
has already begun during the day, under the control of the preconscious. 
Its second portion — the modification imposed by the censorship, the 
attraction exercised by unconscious scenes, and the forcing of its way to 
perception — no doubt proceeds all through the night; and in this respect 
we may perhaps always be right when we express a feeling of having been 
dreaming all night long, though we cannot say what. [See p. 521.] 

But it seems to me unnecessary to suppose that dream-processes really 
maintain, up to the moment of becoming conscious, the chronological or- 
der in which I have described them: that the first thing to appear is the 
transferred dream-wish, that distortion by the censorship follows, then the 


1 [‘A dream is an awakening that is beginning.’] 




D. The Function of Dreams 


575 


regressive change in direction, and so on. 1 have been obliged to adopt this 
order in my description; but what happens in reality is no doubt a 
simultaneous exploring of one path and another, a swinging of the excita- 
tion now this way and now that, until at last it accumulates in the direction 
that is most opportune and one particular grouping becomes the perma- 
nent one. Certain personal experiences of my own lead me to suspect that 
the dream-work often requires more than a day and a night in order to 
achieve its result; and if this is so, we need no longer feel any amazement at 
the extraordinary ingenuity shown in the construction of the dream. In my 
opinion even the demand for the dream to be made intelligible as a percep- 
tual event may be put into effect before the dream attracts consciousness to 
itself. From then onwards, however, the pace is accelerated, for at that point 
a dream is treated in the same fashion as anything else that is perceived. It 
is like a firework, which takes hours to prepare but goes off in a moment. 

The dream-process has by now either acquired sufficient intensity 
through the dream-work to attract consciousness to itself and arouse the 
preconscious, irrespectively of the time and depth of sleep; or its intensity 
is insufficient to achieve this and it must remain in a state of readiness until, 
just before waking, attention becomes more mobile and comes to meet it. 
The majority of dreams appear to operate with comparatively low psychical 
intensities, for they mostly wait until the moment of waking. But this also 
explains the fact that, if we are suddenly woken from deep sleep, we usually 
perceive something that we have dreamt. In such cases, just as when we 
wake of our own accord, the first thing we see is the perceptual content that 
has been constructed by the dream-work and immediately afterwards we 
see the perceptual content that is offered to us from outside ourselves. 

Greater theoretical interest, however, attaches to the dreams which have 
the power to rouse us in the middle of our sleep. Bearing in mind the expe- 
diency which is everywhere else the rule, we may ask why a dream, that is, 
an unconscious wish, is given the power to interfere with sleep, that is, with 
the fulfilment of the preconscious wish. The explanation no doubt lies in 
relations of energy of which we have no knowledge. If we possessed such 
knowledge, we should probably find that allowing the dream to take its 
course and expending a certain amount of more or less detached attention 
on it is an economy of energy compared with holding the unconscious as 
tightly under control at night as in the daytime. [Cf. p. 576.] Experience 
shows that dreaming is compatible with sleeping, even if it interrupts sleep 
several times during the night. One wakes up for an instant and then falls 
asleep again at once. It is like brushing away a fly in one’s sleep: a case of ad 



576 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


hoc awakening. If one falls asleep again, the interruption has been disposed 
of. As is shown by such familiar examples as the sleep of a nursing mother 
or wet-nurse [p. 244], the fulfilment of the wish to sleep is quite compatible 
with maintaining a certain expenditure of attention in some particular 
direction. 

At this point an objection arises, which is based on a better knowledge 
of unconscious processes. 1 myself have asserted that unconscious wishes 
are always active. But in spite of this they seem not to be strong enough 
to make themselves perceptible during the day. If, however, while a state 
of sleep prevails, an unconscious wish has shown itself strong enough to 
construct a dream and arouse the preconscious with it, why should this 
strength fail after the dream has been brought to knowledge? Should not 
the dream continue to recur perpetually, precisely as the vexatious fly 
keeps on coming back after it has been driven away? What right have we 
to assert that dreams get rid of the disturbance of sleep? 

It is perfectly true that unconscious wishes always remain active. They 
represent paths which can always be traversed, whenever a quantity of exci- 
tation makes use of them. [Cf. p. 592 «.] Indeed it is a prominent feature of 
unconscious processes that they are indestructible. In the unconscious noth- 
ing can be brought to an end, nothing is past or forgotten. This is brought 
most vividly home to one in studying the neuroses, and especially hysteria. 
The unconscious path of thoughts, which leads to discharge in a hysterical 
attack, immediately becomes traversable once more, when sufficient excita- 
tion has accumulated. A humiliation that was experienced thirty years ago 
acts exactly like a fresh one throughout the thirty years, as soon as it has ob- 
tained access to the unconscious sources of emotion. As soon as the memory 
of it is touched, it springs into life again and shows itself cathected with ex- 
citation which finds a motor discharge in an attack. This is precisely the 
point at which psychotherapy has to intervene. Its task is to make it possible 
for the unconscious processes to be dealt with finally and be forgotten. For 
the fading of memories and the emotional weakness of impressions which 
are no longer recent, which we are inclined to regard as self-evident and to 
explain as a primary effect of time upon mental memory-traces, are in reality 
secondary modifications which are only brought about by laborious work. 
What performs this work is the preconscious, and psychotherapy can pursue 
no other course than to bring the Ucs. under the domination of the Pcs . 1 


1 [The last clause of this sentence was printed in spaced type only from 1919 on- 
wards. Cf. p. 553 n.] 




D. The Function of Dreams 


577 


Thus there are two possible outcomes for any particular unconscious 
excitatory process. Either it may be left to itself, in which case it eventu- 
ally forces its way through at some point and on this single occasion finds 
discharge for its excitation in movement; or it may come under the influ- 
ence of the preconscious, and its excitation, instead of being discharged, 
may be bound by the preconscious. This second alternative is the one which 
occurs in the process of dreaming. [See p. 597 n.] The cathexis from the Pcs. 
which goes halfway to meet the dream after it has become perceptual, 
having been directed on to it by the excitation in consciousness, binds the 
dream’s unconscious excitation and makes it powerless to act as a distur- 
bance. If it is true that the dreamer wakes for an instant, yet he really has 
brushed away the fly that was threatening to disturb his sleep, it begins to 
dawn on us that it actually is more expedient and economical to allow the 
unconscious wish to take its course, to leave the path to regression open 
to it so that it can construct a dream, and then to bind the dream and dis- 
pose of it with a small expenditure of pre-conscious work — rather than to 
continue keeping a tight rein on the unconscious throughout the whole 
period of sleep. [Cf. p. 575.] It was indeed to be expected that dreaming, 
even though it may originally have been a process without a useful pur- 
pose, would have procured itself some function in the interplay of mental 
forces. And we can now see what that function is. Dreaming has taken on 
the task of bringing back under control of the preconscious the excitation 
in the Ucs. which has been left free; in so doing, it discharges the Ucs. ex- 
citation, serves it as a safety valve and at the same time preserves the sleep 
of the preconscious in return for a small expenditure of waking activity. 
Thus, like all the other psychical structures in the series of which it is a 
member, it constitutes a compromise; it is in the service of both of the 
two systems, since it fulfils the two wishes in so far as they are compatible 
with each other. If we turn back to the ‘excretion theory’ of dreams put 
forward by Robert [1886], which 1 explained on pp. 105 ffi, we shall see 
at a glance that in its essence we must accept his account of the function 
of dreams, though differing from him in his premises and in his view of 
the dream-process itself. [See pp. 20 1 fi] 1 


1 [ Footnote added 1914:] Is this the only function that can be assigned to dreams? 
I know of no other. It is true that Maeder [1912] has attempted to show that 
dreams have other, ‘secondary,’ functions. He started out from the correct ob- 
servation that some dreams contain attempts at solving conflicts, attempts which 
are later carried out in reality and which thus behave as though they were trial 




578 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


The qualification ‘in so far as the two wishes are compatible with each 
other’ implies a hint at the possible case in which the function of dreaming 
may come to grief. The dream-process is allowed to begin as a fulfilment 
of an unconscious wish; but if this attempted wish-fulfilment jars upon the 
preconscious so violently that it is unable to continue sleeping, then the 
dream has made a breach in the compromise and has failed to carry out 
the second half of its task. In that case the dream is immediately broken 
off and replaced by a state of complete waking. Here again it is not really 
the fault of the dream if it has now to appear in the role of a disturber of 
sleep instead of in its normal one of a guardian of sleep; and this fact need 
not prejudice us against its having a useful purpose. This is not the only 
instance in the organism of a contrivance which is normally useful becom- 
ing useless and disturbing as soon as the conditions that give rise to it are 
somewhat modified; and the disturbance at least serves the new purpose 
of drawing attention to the modification and of setting the organism’s reg- 
ulative machinery in motion against it. What I have in mind is of course 
the case of anxiety-dreams, and in order that I may not be thought to be 


practices for waking actions. He therefore drew a parallel between dreams and 
the play of animals and children, which may be regarded as practice in the oper- 
ation of innate instincts and as preparation for serious activity later on, and put 
forward the hypothesis that dreams have a j fonction ludique’ [‘play function’]. 
Shortly before Maeder, Alfred Adler [1911, 215 ».], too, had insisted that 
dreams possessed a function of ‘thinking ahead.’ (In an analysis which I pub- 
lished in 1905 [‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria,’ Part II (1905f)], 
a dream, which could only be regarded as expressing an intention, was repeated 
every night until it was carried out. [Cf. above, p. 21 1 £]) 

A little reflection will convince us, however, that this ‘secondary’ function of 
dreams has no claim to be considered as a part of the subject of dream-interpretation. 
Thinking ahead, forming intentions, framing attempted solutions which may 
perhaps be realized later in waking life, all these, and many other similar things, 
are products of the unconscious and preconscious activity of the mind; they may 
persist in the state of sleep as ‘the day’s residues’ and combine with an uncon- 
scious wish (cf. pp. 550 ff.) in forming a dream. Thus the dream’s function of 
‘thinking ahead’ is rather a function of preconscious waking thought, the prod- 
ucts of which may be revealed to us by the analysis of dreams or of other phe- 
nomena. It has long been the habit to regard dreams as identical with their 
manifest content; but we must now beware equally of the mistake of confusing 
dreams with latent dream-thoughts. [Cf. p. 5 1 0 n. above and a passage at the end 
of the discussion of Case I in Freud’s paper on ‘Dream and Telepathy’ (1922<z).] 




D. The Function of Dreams 


579 


evading this evidence against the theory of wish-fulfilment whenever I 
come across it, I will at all events give some hints of their explanation. 

There is no longer anything contradictory to us in the notion that a 
psychical process which develops anxiety can nevertheless be the fulfil- 
ment of a wish. We know that it can be explained by the fact that the 
wish belongs to one system, the Ucs., while it has been repudiated and 
suppressed by the other system, the Pcs . 1 Even where psychical health is 
perfect, the subjugation of the Ucs. by the Pcs. is not complete; the mea- 
sure of suppression indicates the degree of our psychical normality. Neu- 
rotic symptoms show that the two systems are in conflict with each other; 
they are the products of a compromise which brings the conflict to an 
end for the time being. On the one hand, they allow the Ucs. an outlet 
for the discharge of its excitation, and provide it with a kind of sally-port, 


1 [Footnote added 1919:] ‘A second factor, which is much more important and far- 
reaching, but which is equally overlooked by laymen is the following. No doubt 
a wish-fulfilment must bring pleasure; but the question then arises “To whom?” 
To the person who has the wish, of course. But, as we know, a dreamer’s relation 
to his wishes is a quite peculiar one. He repudiates them and censors them — he 
has no liking for them, in short. So that their fulfilment will give him no plea- 
sure, but just the opposite; and experience shows that this opposite appears in 
the form of anxiety, a fact which has still to be explained. Thus a dreamer in his 
relation to his dream-wishes can only be compared to an amalgamation of two 
separate people who are linked by some important common element. Instead of 
enlarging on this, I will remind you of a familiar fairy tale [referred to above on 
p. 557] in which you will find the same situation repeated. A good fairy prom- 
ised a poor married couple to grant them the fulfilment of their first three 
wishes. They were delighted, and made up their minds to choose their three 
wishes carefully. But a smell of sausages being fried in the cottage next door 
tempted the woman to wish for a couple of them. They were there in a flash; 
and this was the first wish-fulfilment. But the man was furious, and in his rage 
wished that the sausages were hanging on his wife’s nose. This happened too; 
and the sausages were not to be dislodged from their new position. This was the 
second wish-fulfilment; but the wish was the man’s, and its fulfilment was most 
disagreeable for his wife. You know the rest of the story. Since after all they were 
in fact one — man and wife — the third wish was bound to be that the sausages 
should come away from the woman’s nose. This fairy tale might be used in 
many other connections; but here it serves only to illustrate the possibility that 
if two people are not at one with each other the fulfilment of a wish of one of 
them may bring nothing but unpleasure to the other.’ ( Introductory Lectures on 
Psycho-Analysis [Freud, 1916-17], Lecture XIV.) 




580 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 

while, on the other hand, they make it possible for the Pcs. to control the 
Ucs. to some extent. It is instructive to consider, for instance, the signifi- 
cance of a hysterical phobia or an agoraphobia. Let us suppose that a neu- 
rotic patient is unable to cross the street alone — a condition which we 
rightly regard as a ‘symptom.’ If we remove this symptom by compelling 
him to carry out the act of which he believes himself incapable, the con- 
sequence will be an attack of anxiety; and indeed the occurrence of an 
anxiety-attack in the street is often the precipitating cause of the onset of 
an agoraphobia. We see, therefore, that the symptom has been con- 
structed in order to avoid an outbreak of anxiety; the phobia is erected 
like a frontier fortification against the anxiety. 

Our discussion cannot be carried any further without examining the 
part played by the affects in these processes; but we can only do so imper- 
fectly in the present connection. Let us assume, then, that the suppression 
of the Ucs. is necessary above all because, if the course of ideas in the Ucs. 
were left to itself, it would generate an affect which was originally of a pleas- 
urable nature, but became unpleasurable after the process of ‘repression’ oc- 
curred. The purpose, and the result too, of suppression is to prevent this 
release of unpleasure. The suppression extends over the ideational content 
of the Ucs., since the release of unpleasure might start from that content. 
This presupposes a quite specific assumption as to the nature of the gener- 
ation of affect. 1 It is viewed as a motor or secretory function, the key to 
whose innervation lies in the ideas in the Ucs. Owing to the domination es- 
tablished by the Pcs. these ideas are, as it were, throttled, and inhibited from 
sending out impulses which would generate affect. If, therefore, the cathexis 
from the Pcs. ceases, the danger is that the unconscious excitations may re- 
lease affect of a kind which (as a result of the repression which has already 
occurred) can only be experienced as unpleasure, as anxiety. 

This danger materializes if the dream-process is allowed to take its 
course. The conditions which determine its realization are that repressions 
must have occurred and that the suppressed wishful impulses shall be able 
to grow sufficiently strong. These determinants are thus quite outside the 
psychological framework of dream-formation. If it were not for the fact 
that our topic is connected with the subject of the generation of anxiety 
by the single factor of the liberation of the Ucs. during sleep, I should be 
able to omit any discussion of anxiety-dreams and avoid the necessity for 
entering in these pages into all the obscurities surrounding them. 


1 [For this assumption cf. p. 474 and footnote.] 




D. The Function of Dreams 


581 


The theory of anxiety-dreams, as I have already repeatedly declared, 
forms part of the psychology of the neuroses. 1 We have nothing more to 
do with it when once we have indicated its point of contact with the topic 
of the dream-process. There is only one thing more that I can do. Since 1 
have asserted that neurotic anxiety arises from sexual sources, I can sub- 
mit some anxiety-dreams to analysis in order to show the sexual material 
present in their dream-thoughts. 2 

I have good reasons for leaving on one side in the present discussion 
the copious examples afforded by my neurotic patients, and for preferring 
to quote some anxiety-dreams dreamt by young people. 

It is dozens of years since I myself had a true anxiety-dream. But I re- 
member one from my seventh or eighth year, which 1 submitted to inter- 
pretation some thirty years later. It was a very vivid one, and in it I saw my 
beloved mother, ivith a peculiarly peaceful, sleeping expression on her features, 
being carried into the room by tivo {or three ) people with birds’ beaks and laid 
upon the bed. I awoke in tears and screaming, and interrupted my parents’ 
sleep. The strangely draped and unnaturally tall figures with birds’ beaks 
were derived from the illustrations to Philippson’s Bible. 3 1 fancy they 
must have been gods with falcons’ heads from an ancient Egyptian funer- 
ary relief. Besides this, the analysis brought to mind an ill-mannered boy, 
a son of a concierge, who used to play with us on the grass in front of the 
house when we were children, and who I am inclined to think was called 
Philipp. It seems to me that it was from this boy that I first heard the vul- 
gar term for sexual intercourse, instead of which educated people always 
use a Latin word, ‘to copulate,’ and which was clearly enough indicated by 
the choice of the falcons’ heads, 4 1 must have guessed the sexual signifi- 
cance of the word from the face of my young instructor, who was well ac- 
quainted with the facts of life. The expression on my mother’s features in 


1 [The following sentence was added at this point in 1 9 1 1 , but omitted again in 
1925 and subsequently: ‘Anxiety in dreams, I should like to insist, is an anxiety 
problem and not a dream problem.’] 

2 [Some of the comments in what follows would require revision in the light of 
Freud’s later views on anxiety. See also pp. 194 ff., 256 and 352.] 

3 [Die israelitische Bibel, an edition of the Old Testament in Hebrew and German, 
Leipzig, 1839-54 (Second ed. 1858). A footnote to the fourth chapter of Deuter- 
onomy shows a number of woodcuts of Egyptian gods, several with birds’ heads.] 

4 [The German slang term referred to is ‘vogeln,’ from ‘Vogel’ the ordinary word 
for ‘bird.’] 




582 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


the dream was copied from the view I had had of my grandfather a few 
days before his death as he lay snoring in a coma. The interpretation car- 
ried out in the dream by the ‘secondary revision’ [p. 495] must therefore 
have been that my mother was dying; the funerary relief fitted in with this. 
I awoke in anxiety, which did not cease till I had woken my parents up. I 
remember that I suddenly grew calm when I saw my mother’s face, as 
though I had needed to be reassured that she was not dead. But this ‘sec- 
ondary’ interpretation of the dream had already been made under the in- 
fluence of the anxiety which had developed. I was not anxious because I 
had dreamt that my mother was dying; but I interpreted the dream in that 
sense in my preconscious revision of it because I was already under the in- 
fluence of the anxiety. The anxiety can be traced back, when repression is 
taken into account, to an obscure and evidently sexual craving that had 
found appropriate expression in the visual content of the dream. 

A twenty-seven-year-old man, who had been seriously ill for a year, re- 
ported that when he was between eleven and thirteen he had repeatedly 
dreamt (to the accompaniment of severe anxiety) that a man with a hatchet 
was pursuing him; he tried to run away, but seemed to be paralysed and could 
not move from the spot. This is a good example of a very common sort of 
anxiety-dream, which would never be suspected of being sexual. In analy- 
sis, the dreamer first came upon a story (dating from a time later than the 
dream) told him by his uncle, of how he had been attacked in the street 
one night by a suspicious-looking individual; the dreamer himself con- 
cluded from this association that he may have heard of some similar 
episode at the time of the dream. In connection with the hatchet, he re- 
membered that at about that time he had once injured his hand with a 
hatchet while he was chopping up wood. He then passed immediately to 
his relations with his younger brother. He used to ill-treat this brother and 
knock him down; and he particularly remembered an occasion when he 
had kicked him on the head with his boot and had drawn blood, and how 
his mother had said: ‘I’m afraid he’ll be the death of him one day.’ While 
he still seemed to be occupied with the subject of violence, a recollection 
from his ninth year suddenly occurred to him. His parents had come 
home late and had gone to bed while he pretended to be asleep; soon he 
had heard sounds of panting and other noises which had seemed to him 
uncanny, and he had also been able to make out their position in the bed. 
Further thoughts showed that he had drawn an analogy between this rela- 
tion between his parents and his own relation to his younger brother. He 
had subsumed what happened between his parents under the concept of 



D. The Function of Dreams 


583 


violence and struggling; and he had found evidence in favour of this view 
in the fact that he had often noticed blood in his mother’s bed. 

It is, I may say, a matter of daily experience that sexual intercourse be- 
tween adults strikes any children who may observe it as something un- 
canny and that it arouses anxiety in them. I have explained this anxiety 
by arguing that what we are dealing with is a sexual excitation with which 
their understanding is unable to cope and which they also, no doubt, re- 
pudiate because their parents are involved in it, and which is therefore 
transformed into anxiety. At a still earlier period of life sexual excitations 
directed towards a parent of the opposite sex have not yet met with re- 
pression and, as we have seen, are freely expressed. (See pp. 274 ff.) 

I should have no hesitation in giving the same explanation of the at- 
tacks of night terrors accompanied by hallucinations ( pavor nocturnus) 
which are so frequent in children. In this case too it can only be a question 
of sexual impulses which have not been understood and which have been 
repudiated. Investigation would probably show a periodicity in the occur- 
rence of the attacks, since an increase in sexual libido can be brought about 
not only by accidental exciting impressions but also by successive waves of 
spontaneous developmental processes. 

I lack a sufficiency of material based upon observation to enable me to 
confirm this explanation. 1 

Paediatricians, on the other hand, seem to lack the only line of 
approach which can make this whole class of phenomena intelligible, 
whether from the somatic or from the psychical aspect. I cannot resist 
quoting an amusing instance of the way in which the blinkers of medical 
mythology can cause an observer to miss an understanding of such cases 
by a narrow margin. My instance is taken from a thesis on pavor nocturnus 
by Debacker (1881, 66): 

A thirteen-year-old boy in delicate health began to be apprehensive 
and dreamy. His sleep became disturbed and was interrupted almost once 
a week by severe attacks of anxiety accompanied by hallucinations. He al- 
ways retained a very clear recollection of these dreams. He said that the 
Devil had shouted at him: ‘Now we’ve got you, now we’ve got you!’ 
There was then a smell of pitch and brimstone and his skin was burnt by 
flames. He woke up from the dream in terror, and at first could not cry 


1 [ Footnote added 1919:] Since I wrote this a great quantity of such material has 
been brought forward in psycho-analytic literature. 




584 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


out. When he had found his voice he was clearly heard to say: ‘No, no, 
not me; I’ve not done anything!’ or ‘Please not! I won’t do it again!’ or 
sometimes: ‘Albert never did that!’ Later, he refused to undress ‘because 
the flames only caught him when he was undressed.’ While he was still 
having these devil-dreams, which were a threat to his health, he was sent 
into the country. There he recovered in the course of eighteen months, 
and once, when he was fifteen, he confessed: ‘Je n’osais pas l’avouer, mais 
j’eprouvais continuellement des picotements et des surexcitations aux par- 
ties a la fin, cela m’enervait tant que plusieurs fois j’ai pense me jeter par 
la fenetre du dortoir.’ 1 2 3 

There is really very little difficulty in inferring: (1) that the boy had 
masturbated when he was younger, that he had probably denied it, and 
that he had been threatened with severe punishment for his bad habit (cf. 
his admission: ‘Je ne le ferais plus,’ and his denial: ‘Albert n’a jamais fait 
5a’); (2) that with the onset of puberty the temptation to masturbate had 
revived with the tickling in his genitals; but (3) that a struggle for repres- 
sion had broken out in him, which had suppressed his libido and trans- 
formed it into anxiety, and that the anxiety had taken over the 
punishments with which he had been threatened earlier. 

And now let us see the inferences drawn by our author (ibid., 69): 
‘The following conclusions can be drawn from this observation: 

‘(1) The influence of puberty upon a boy in delicate health can lead 
to a condition of great weakness and can result in a considerable degree 
of cerebral anaemia ? 

‘(2) This cerebral anaemia produces character changes, demonomanic 
hallucinations and very violent nocturnal (and perhaps also diurnal) 
anxiety-states. 

‘(3) The boy’s demonomania and self-reproaches go back to the in- 
fluences of his religious education, which affected him as a child. 

‘(4) All the symptoms disappeared in the course of a somewhat pro- 
tracted visit to the country, as the result of physical exercise and the re- 
gaining of strength with the passage of puberty. 


1 1 have italicized this word, but it is impossible to misunderstand it. 

1 [‘I didn’t dare admit it; but I was continually having prickly feelings and overex- 
citement in my parts; in the end it got on my nerves so much that I often 
thought of jumping out of the dormitory window.’] 

3 The italics are mine. 




E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 585 

‘(5) A predisposing influence upon the origin of the child’s brain con- 
dition may perhaps be attributed to heredity and to a past syphilitic in- 
fection in his father.’ 

And here is the final conclusion: ‘Nous avons fait entrer cette observa- 
tion dans le cadre des delires apyretiques d’inanition, car c’est a l’ischemie 
cerebrale que nous rattachons cet etat particulier.’ 1 


(E) 

THE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PROCESSES— 
REPRESSION 

In venturing on an attempt to penetrate more deeply into the psychol- 
ogy of dream-processes, I have set myself a hard task, and one to which my 
powers of exposition are scarcely equal. Elements in this complicated 
whole which are in fact simultaneous can only be represented successively 
in my description of them, while, in putting forward each point, I must 
avoid appearing to anticipate the grounds on which it is based: difficulties 
such as these it is beyond my strength to master. In all this I am paying the 
penalty for the fact that in my account of dream-psychology I have been 
unable to follow the historical development of my own views. Though my 
own line of approach to the subject of dreams was determined by my pre- 
vious work on the psychology of the neuroses, I had not intended to make 
use of the latter as a basis of reference in the present work. Nevertheless I 
am constantly being driven to do so, instead of proceeding, as 1 should 
have wished, in the contrary direction and using dreams as a means of ap- 
proach to the psychology of the neuroses. I am conscious of all the trouble 
in which my readers are thus involved, but I can see no means of avoiding 
it. [See p. 129 «.] 

In my dissatisfaction at this state of things, I am glad to pause for a little 
over another consideration which seems to put a higher value on my ef- 
forts. I found myself faced by a topic on which, as has been shown in my 


1 [‘We have classified this case among the apyretic deliria of inanition, for we at- 
tribute this particular state to cerebral ischaemia.’] 




586 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


first chapter, the opinions of the authorities were characterized by the 
sharpest contradictions. My treatment of the problems of dreams has 
found room for the majority of these contradictory views. I have only 
found it necessary to give a categorical denial of two of them — the view 
that dreaming is a meaningless process [pp. 83 f£] and the view that it is a 
somatic one [pp. 104 £]. Apart from this, I have been able to find a justi- 
fication for all these mutually contradictory opinions at one point or other 
of my complicated thesis and to show that they had lighted upon some 
portion of the truth. 

The view that dreams carry on the occupations and interests of waking 
life [pp. 41 £] has been entirely confirmed by the discovery of the con- 
cealed dream-thoughts. These are only concerned with what seems impor- 
tant to us and interests us greatly. Dreams are never occupied with minor 
details. But we have also found reason for accepting the contrary view, that 
dreams pick up indifferent refuse left over from the previous day [pp. 5 1 
f£] and that they cannot get control of any major daytime interest until it 
has been to some extent withdrawn from waking activity [p. 51]. We have 
found that this holds good of the dream’s content, which gives expression 
to the dream-thoughts in a form modified by distortion. For reasons con- 
nected with the mechanism of association, as we have seen, the dream- 
process finds it easier to get control of recent or indifferent ideational 
material which has not yet been requisitioned by waking thought-activity; 
and for reasons of censorship it transfers psychical intensity from what is 
important but objectionable on to what is indifferent. 

The fact that dreams are hypermnesic [pp. 44 f£] and have access to 
material from childhood [pp. 48 f£] has become one of the cornerstones 
of our teaching. Our theory of dreams regards wishes originating in in- 
fancy as the indispensable motive force for the formation of dreams. 

It has naturally not occurred to us to throw any doubt on the signifi- 
cance, which has been experimentally demonstrated, of external sensory 
stimuli during sleep [pp. 55 ££]; but we have shown that such material 
stands in the same relation to the dream-wish as do the residues of 
thought left over from daytime activity. Nor have we seen any reason to 
dispute the view that dreams interpret objective sensory stimuli just as il- 
lusions do [pp. 60 £]; but we have found the motive which provides the 
reason for that interpretation, a reason which has been left unspecified by 
other writers. Interpretation is carried out in such a way that the object 
perceived shall not interrupt sleep and shall be usable for purposes of 
wish-fulfilment. As regards subjective states of excitation in the sense or- 



E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 


587 


gans during sleep, the occurrence of which seems to have been proved by 
Trumbull Ladd [1892; see above, pp. 64 £], it is true that we have not ac- 
cepted them as a particular source of dreams; but we have been able to 
explain them as resulting from the regressive revival of memories that are 
in operation behind the dream. 

Internal organic sensations, which have commonly been taken as a car- 
dinal point in explanations of dreaming [pp. 65 ff.], have retained a place, 
though a humbler one, in our theory. Such sensations — sensations of 
falling, for instance, or floating, or being inhibited — provide a material 
which is accessible at any time and of which the dream-work makes use, 
whenever it has need of it, for expressing the dream-thoughts. 

The view that the dream-process is a rapid or instantaneous one [p. 92 
£] is in our opinion correct as regards the perception by consciousness of 
the preconstructed dream-content; it seems probable that the preceding 
portions of the dream-process run a slow and fluctuating course. We have 
been able to contribute towards the solution of the riddle of dreams which 
contain a great amount of material compressed into the briefest moment 
of time; we have suggested that it is a question in such cases of getting hold 
of ready-made structures already present in the mind. 

The fact that dreams are distorted and mutilated by memory [pp. 76 £] 
is accepted by us but in our opinion constitutes no obstacle; for it is no 
more than the last and manifest portion of a distorting activity which has 
been in operation from the very start of the dream’s formation. 

As regards the embittered and apparently irreconcilable dispute as to 
whether the mind sleeps at night [p. 83 £] or is as much in command of 
all its faculties as it is by day [pp. 89 £], we have found that both parties 
are right but that neither is wholly right. We have found evidence in the 
dream-thoughts of a highly complex intellectual function, operating with 
almost the whole resources of the mental apparatus. Nevertheless it cannot 
be disputed that these dream-thoughts originated during the day, and it is 
imperative to assume that there is such a thing as a sleeping state of the 
mind. Thus even the theory of partial sleep [p. 103 £] has shown its value, 
though we have found that what characterizes the state of sleep is not the 
disintegration of mental bonds but the concentration of the psychical sys- 
tem which is in command during the day upon the wish to sleep. The fac- 
tor of withdrawal from the external world [pp. 41 £] retains its significance 
in our scheme; it helps, though not as the sole determinant, to make pos- 
sible the regressive character of representation in dreams. The renunciation 
of voluntary direction of the flow of ideas [pp. 78 £] cannot be disputed; 



588 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 

but this does not deprive mental life of all purpose, for we have seen how, 
after voluntary purposive ideas have been abandoned, involuntary ones as- 
sume command. We have not merely accepted the fact of the looseness of 
associative connections in dreams [p. 87], but we have shown that it ex- 
tends far further than had been suspected; we have found, however, that 
these loose connections are merely obligatory substitutes for others which 
are valid and significant. It is quite true that we have described dreams as 
absurd; but examples have taught us how sensible a dream can be even 
when it appears to be absurd. 

We have no difference of opinion over the functions that are to be as- 
signed to dreams. The view that dreams act as a safety-valve to the mind 
[p. 105 f.] and that, in the words of Robert [1886, 10 £], all kinds of 
harmful things are made harmless by being presented in a dream — not 
only does this view coincide exactly with our theory of the double wish- 
fulfilment brought about by dreams, but the way in which it is phrased is 
more intelligible to us than to Robert himself. The view that the mind 
has free play in its functioning in dreams [p. 109] is represented in our 
theory by the fact of the preconscious activity allowing dreams to take 
their course. Such phrases as ‘the return of the mind in dreams to an em- 
bryonic point of view’ or the words used by Havelock Ellis [1899, 721] 
to describe dreams — ‘an archaic world of vast emotions and imperfect 
thoughts’ [p. 88] — strike us as happy anticipations of our own assertions 
that primitive modes of activity which are suppressed during the day are 
concerned in the construction of dreams. We have been able to accept en- 
tirely as our own what Sully [1893, 362] has written: ‘Our dreams are a 
means of conserving these [earlier] successive personalities. When asleep 
we go back to the old ways of looking at things and of feeling about 
them, to impulses and activities which long ago dominated us’ [p. 89]. 1 
For us no less than for Delage [1891] what has been ‘suppressed’ [p. 107 £] 
has become ‘the motive force of dreams.’ 

We have fully appreciated the importance of the part ascribed by 
Schemer [1861] to ‘dream-imagination,’ as well as Schemer’s own inter- 
pretations [pp. 109 f£], but we have been obliged to transport them, as it 
were, to a different position in the problem. The point is not that dreams 
create the imagination, but rather that the unconscious activity of the 
imagination has a large share in the construction of the dream-thoughts. 


1 [This sentence was added in 1914.] 




E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 


589 


We remain in Schemer’s debt for having indicated the source of the 
dream-thoughts; but nearly everything that he ascribes to the dream-work 
is really attributable to the activity of the unconscious during daytime, 
which is the instigating agent of dreams no less than of neurotic symp- 
toms. We have been obliged to distinguish the ‘dream-work’ as some- 
thing quite different and with a much narrower connotation. 

Finally, we have by no means abandoned the relation between dreams 
and mental disorders [pp. 1 14 ff.], but have established it more firmly on 
fresh ground. 

We have thus been able to find a place in our structure for the most var- 
ious and contradictory findings of earlier writers, thanks to the novelty of 
our theory of dreams, which combines them, as it were, into a higher 
unity. Some of those findings we have put to other uses, but we have 
wholly rejected only a few. Nevertheless our edifice is still uncompleted. 
Apart from the many perplexing questions in which we have become in- 
volved in making our way into the obscurities of psychology, we seem to 
be troubled by a fresh contradiction. On the one hand we have supposed 
that the dream-thoughts arise through entirely normal mental activity; but 
on the other hand we have discovered a number of quite abnormal pro- 
cesses of thought among the dream-thoughts, which extend into the 
dream-content, and which we then repeat in the course of our dream- 
interpretation. Everything that we have described as the ‘dream-work’ 
seems to depart so widely from what we recognize as rational thought- 
processes that the most severe strictures passed by earlier writers on the low 
level of psychical functioning in dreams must appear fully justified. 

It may be that we shall only find enlightenment and assistance in this 
difficulty by carrying our investigation still further. And I will begin by 
picking out for closer examination one of the conjunctures which may 
lead to the formation of a dream. 

A dream, as we have discovered, takes the place of a number of thoughts 
which are derived from our daily life and which form a completely logical 
sequence. We cannot doubt, then, that these thoughts originate from our 
normal mental life. All the attributes which we value highly in our train of 
thought, and which characterize them as complex achievements of a high 
order, are to be found once more in dream-thoughts. There is no need to 
assume, however, that this activity of thought is performed during sleep — 
a possibility which would gravely confuse what has hitherto been our set- 
tled picture of the psychical state of sleep. On the contrary, these thoughts 



590 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


may very well have originated from the previous day, they may have pro- 
ceeded unobserved by our consciousness from their start, and may already 
have been completed at the onset of sleep. The most that we can conclude 
from this is that it proves that the most complicated achievements of thought 
are possible ivithout the assistance of consciousness — a fact which we could not 
fail to learn in any case from every psycho-analysis of a patient suffering 
from hysteria or from obsessional ideas. These dream-thoughts are certainly 
not in themselves inadmissible to consciousness; there may have been a 
number of reasons for their not having become conscious to us during the 
day. Becoming conscious is connected with the application of a particular 
psychical function [p. 542], that of attention — a function which, as it 
seems, is only available in a specific quantity, and this may have been di- 
verted from the train of thought in question on to some other purpose. 1 
There is another way, too, in which trains of thought of this kind may be 
withheld from consciousness. The course of our conscious reflections shows 
us that we follow a particular path in our application of attention. If, as we 
follow this path, we come upon an idea which will not bear criticism, we 
break off: we drop the cathexis of attention. Now it seems that the train of 
thought which has thus been initiated and dropped can continue to spin it- 
self out without attention being turned to it again, unless at some point or 
other it reaches a specially high degree of intensity which forces attention 
to it. Thus, if a train of thought is initially rejected (consciously, perhaps) 
by a judgement that it is wrong or that it is useless for the immediate intel- 
lectual purposes in view, the result may be that this train of thought will 
proceed, unobserved by consciousness, until the onset of sleep. 

To sum up — we describe a train of thought such as this as ‘precon- 
scious’; we regard it as completely rational and believe that it may either 
have been simply neglected or broken off and suppressed. Let us add a 
frank account of how we picture the occurrence of a train of ideas. We 
believe that, starting from a purposive idea, a given amount of excitation, 
which we term ‘cathectic energy,’ is displaced along the associative paths 
selected by that purposive idea. A train of thought which is ‘neglected’ is 
one which has not received this cathexis; a train of thought which is ‘sup- 
pressed’ or ‘repudiated’ is one from which this cathexis has been with- 


1 [The concept of ‘attention’ plays a very small part in Freud’s later writings. It 
figures prominently, on the other hand, in his ‘Project for a Scientific Psychol- 
ogy’ (Freud, 1950 a), e.g. in the opening section of Part III. Cf. also pp. 573 f. 
and 608.] 




E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 


591 


draivn. In both cases they are left to their own excitations. Under certain 
conditions a train of thought with a purposive cathexis is capable of at- 
tracting the attention of consciousness to itself and in that event, through 
the agency of consciousness, receives a ‘hyper-cathexis.’ We shall be 
obliged presently to explain our view of the nature and function of con- 
sciousness. [See pp. 610 ff.] 

A train of thought that has been set going like this in the preconscious 
may either cease spontaneously or persist. We picture the first of these out- 
comes as implying that the energy attaching to the train of thought is dif- 
fused along all the associative paths that radiate from it; this energy sets the 
whole network of thoughts in a state of excitation which lasts for a certain 
time and then dies away as the excitation in search of discharge becomes 
transformed into a quiescent cathexis. If this first outcome supervenes, the 
process is of no further significance so far as dream-formation is con- 
cerned. Lurking in our preconscious, however, there are other purposive 
ideas, which are derived from sources in our unconscious and from wishes 
which are always on the alert. These may take control of the excitation at- 
taching to the group of thoughts which has been left to its own devices, 
they may establish a connection between it and an unconscious wish, and 
they may ‘transfer’ to it the energy belonging to the unconscious wish. 
Thenceforward the neglected or suppressed train of thought is in a posi- 
tion to persist, though the reinforcement it has received gives it no right 
of entry into consciousness. We may express this by saying that what has 
hitherto been a preconscious train of thought has now been ‘drawn into 
the unconscious.’ 

There are other conjunctures which may lead to the formation of a 
dream. The preconscious train of thought may have been linked to the un- 
conscious wish from the first and may for that reason have been repudiated 
by the dominant purposive cathexis; or an unconscious wish may become 
active for other reasons (from somatic causes, perhaps) and may seek to ef- 
fect a transference on to the psychical residues that are uncathected by the 
Pcs. without their coming halfway to meet it. But all three cases have the 
same final outcome: a train of thought comes into being in the precon- 
scious which is without a preconscious cathexis but has received a cathexis 
from an unconscious wish. 

From this point onwards the train of thought undergoes a series of 
transformations which we can no longer recognize as normal psychical 
processes and which lead to a result that bewilders us — a psychopatholog- 
ical structure. I will enumerate these processes and classify them. 



592 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


(1) The intensities of the individual ideas become capable of discharge 
en bloc and pass over from one idea to another, so that certain ideas are 
formed which are endowed with great intensity. [Cf. pp. 345 f.] And since 
this process is repeated several times, the intensity of a whole train of 
thought may eventually be concentrated in a single ideational element. 
Here we have the fact of ‘compression’ or ‘condensation,’ which has be- 
come familiar in the dream-work. It is this that is mainly responsible for 
the bewildering impression made on us by dreams, for nothing at all anal- 
ogous to it is known to us in mental life that is normal and accessible to 
consciousness. In normal mental life, too, we find ideas which, being the 
nodal points or end-results of whole chains of thought, possess a high de- 
gree of psychical significance; but their significance is not expressed by any 
feature that is obvious in a sensory manner to internal perception; their per- 
ceptual presentation is not in any respect more intense on account of their 
psychical significance. In the process of condensation, on the other hand, 
every psychical interconnection is transformed into an intensification of its 
ideational content. The case is the same as when, in preparing a book for 
the press, I have some word which is of special importance for understand- 
ing the text printed in spaced or heavy type; or in speech I should pro- 
nounce the same word loudly and slowly and with special emphasis. The 
first of these two analogies reminds us at once of an example provided by 
the dream- work itself; the word ‘trimethylamin ’ in the dream of Irma’s in- 
jection [p. 132]. Art historians have drawn our attention to the fact that 
the earliest historical sculptures obey a similar principle: they express the 
rank of the persons represented by their size. A king is represented twice 
or three times as large as his attendants or as his defeated enemies. A sculp- 
ture of Roman date would make use of subtler means for producing the 
same result. The figure of the Emperor would be placed in the middle, 
standing erect, and would be modelled with especial care, while his ene- 
mies would be prostrate at his feet; but he would no longer be a giant 
among dwarfs. The bows with which inferiors greet their superiors among 
ourselves today are an echo of the same ancient principle of representation. 

The direction in which condensations in dreams proceed is determined 
on the one hand by the rational preconscious relations of the dream- 
thoughts, and on the other by the attraction exercised by visual memories 
in the unconscious. The outcome of the activity of condensation is the 
achievement of the intensities required for forcing a way through into the 
perceptual systems. 



E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 


593 


(2) Owing, once more, to the freedom with which the intensities can 
be transferred, ‘intermediate ideas,’ resembling compromises, are con- 
structed under the sway of condensation. (Cf. the numerous instances I 
have given of this [e.g. pp. 310 ff.].) This is again something unheard-of 
in normal chains of ideas, where the main stress is laid on the selection 
and retention of the ‘right’ ideational element. On the other hand, com- 
posite structures and compromises occur with remarkable frequency 
when we try to express preconscious thoughts in speech. They are then 
regarded as species of ‘slips of the tongue.’ 

(3) The ideas which transfer their intensities to each other stand in 
the loosest mutual relations. They are linked by associations of a kind 
that is scorned by our normal thinking and relegated to the use of jokes. 
In particular, we find associations based on homonyms and verbal simi- 
larities treated as equal in value to the rest. 

(4) Thoughts which are mutually contradictory make no attempt to 
do away with each other, but persist side by side. They often combine to 
form condensations, just as though there were no contradiction between 
them, or arrive at compromises such as our conscious thoughts would 
never tolerate but such as are often admitted in our actions. 

These are some of the most striking of the abnormal processes to 
which the dream-thoughts, previously constructed on rational lines, are 
subjected in the course of the dream-work. It will be seen that the chief 
characteristic of these processes is that the whole stress is laid upon mak- 
ing the cathecting energy mobile and capable of discharge; the content 
and the proper meaning of the psychical elements to which the cathexes 
are attached are treated as of little consequence. It might have been sup- 
posed that condensation and the formation of compromises is only car- 
ried out for the sake of facilitating regression, that is, when it is a question 
of tranforming thoughts into images. But the analysis — and still more the 
synthesis — of dreams which include no such regression to images, e.g. the 
dream of ‘Autodidasker’ [pp. 316 ff.], exhibits the same processes of dis- 
placement and condensation as the rest. 

Thus we are driven to conclude that two fundamentally different 
kinds of psychical process are concerned in the formation of dreams. One 
of these produces perfectly rational dream-thoughts, of no less validity 
than normal thinking; while the other treats these thoughts in a manner 
which is in the highest degree bewildering and irrational. We have already 



594 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


in Chapter VI segregated this second psychical process as being the 
dream-work proper. What light have we now to throw upon its origin? 

It would not be possible for us to answer this question if we had not 
made some headway in the study of the psychology of the neuroses, and 
particularly of hysteria. We have found from this that the same irrational 
psychical processes, and others that we have not specified, dominate the 
production of hysterical symptoms. In hysteria, too, we come across a se- 
ries of perfectly rational thoughts, equal in validity to our conscious 
thoughts; but to begin with we know nothing of their existence in this 
form and we can only reconstruct them subsequently. If they force them- 
selves upon our notice at any point, we discover by analysing the symp- 
tom which has been produced that these normal thoughts have been 
submitted to abnormal treatment: they have been transformed into the 
symptom by means of condensation and the formation of compromises, by way 
of superficial associations and in disregard of contradictions, and also, it may 
be, along the path of regression. In view of the complete identity between 
the characteristic features of the dream-work and those of the psychical 
activity which issues in psychoneurotic symptoms, we feel justified in car- 
rying over to dreams the conclusions we have been led to by hysteria. 

We accordingly borrow the following thesis from the theory of hyste- 
ria: a normal train of thought is only submitted to abnormal psychical treat- 
ment of the sort ive have been describing if an unconscious wish, derived from 
infancy and in a state of repression, has been transferred on to it. In accor- 
dance with this thesis we have constructed our theory of dreams on the 
assumption that the dream-wish which provides the motive power invari- 
ably originates from the unconscious — an assumption which, as I myself 
am ready to admit, cannot be proved to hold generally, though neither 
can it be disproved. But in order to explain what is meant by ‘repression,’ 
a term with which we have already made play so many times, it is neces- 
sary to proceed a stage further with our psychological scaffolding. 

We have already [pp. 564 ffi] explored the fiction of a primitive psychi- 
cal apparatus whose activities are regulated by an effort to avoid an accu- 
mulation of excitation and to maintain itself so far as possible without 
excitation. For that reason it is built upon the plan of a reflex apparatus. 
The power of movement, which is in the first instance a means of bringing 
about internal alterations in its body, is at its disposal as the path to dis- 
charge. We went on to discuss the psychical consequences of an ‘experience 
of satisfaction’; and in that connection we were already able to add a sec- 



E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 


595 


ond hypothesis, to the effect that the accumulation of excitation (brought 
about in various ways that need not concern us) is felt as unpleasure and 
that it sets the apparatus in action with a view to repeating the experience 
of satisfaction, which involved a diminution of excitation and was felt as 
pleasure. A current of this kind in the apparatus, starting from unpleasure 
and aiming at pleasure, we have termed a ‘wish’; and we have asserted that 
only a wish is able to set the apparatus in motion and that the course of 
the excitation in it is automatically regulated by feelings of pleasure and 
unpleasure. The first wishing seems to have been a hallucinatory cathect- 
ing of the memory of satisfaction. Such hallucinations, however, if they 
were not to be maintained to the point of exhaustion, proved to be inade- 
quate to bring about the cessation of the need or, accordingly, the pleasure 
attaching to satisfaction. 

A second activity — or, as we put it, the activity of a second system — 
became necessary, which would not allow the mnemic cathexis to proceed 
as far as perception and from there to bind the psychical forces; instead, 
it diverted the excitation arising from the need along a roundabout path 
which ultimately, by means of voluntary movement, altered the external 
world in such a way that it became possible to arrive at a real perception 
of the object of satisfaction. We have already outlined our schematic pic- 
ture of the psychical apparatus up to this point; the two systems are the 
germ of what, in the fully developed apparatus, we have described as the 
Ucs. and Pcs. 

In order to be able to employ the power of movement to make alter- 
ations in the external world that shall be effective, it is necessary to accu- 
mulate a great number of experiences in the mnemic systems and a 
multiplicity of permanent records of the associations called up in this mne- 
mic material by different purposive ideas. [Cf. p. 541.] We can now carry 
our hypotheses a step further. The activity of this second system, con- 
stantly feeling its way, and alternately sending out and withdrawing ca- 
thexes, needs on the one hand to have the whole of the material of memory 
freely at its command; but on the other hand it would be an unnecessary 
expenditure of energy if it sent out large quantities of cathexis along the 
various paths of thought and thus caused them to dream away to no useful 
purpose and diminish the quantity available for altering the external world. 
I therefore postulate that for the sake of efficiency the second system suc- 
ceeds in retaining the major part of its cathexes of energy in a state of 
quiescence and in employing only a small part on displacement. The me- 
chanics of these processes are quite unknown to me; anyone who wished 



596 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 

to take these ideas seriously would have to look for physical analogies to 
them and find a means of picturing the movements that accompany exci- 
tation of neurones. All that I insist upon is the idea that the activity of the 
first tjt-system is directed towards securing the free discharge of the quanti- 
ties of excitation, while the second system, by means of the cathexes ema- 
nating from it, succeeds in inhibiting this discharge and in transforming 
the cathexis into a quiescent one, no doubt with a simultaneous raising of 
its potential. I presume, therefore, that under the dominion of the second 
system the discharge of excitation is governed by quite different mechanical 
conditions from those in force under the dominion of the first system. 
When once the second system has concluded its exploratory thought- 
activity, it releases the inhibition and damming-up of the excitations and 
allows them to discharge themselves in movement. 

Some interesting reflections follow if we consider the relations between 
this inhibition upon discharge exercised by the second system and the regu- 
lation effected by the unpleasure principle. 1 Let us examine the antithesis to 
the primary experience of satisfaction — namely, the experience of an external 
fright. Let us suppose that the primitive apparatus is impinged upon by a 
perceptual stimulus which is a source of painful excitation. Unco-ordinated 
motor manifestations will follow until one of them withdraws the apparatus 
from the perception and at the same time from the pain. If the perception 
re-appears, the movement will at once be repeated (a movement of flight, it 
may be) till the perception has disappeared once more. In this case, no incli- 
nation will remain to recathect the perception of the source of pain, either 
hallucinatorily or in any other way. On the contrary, there will be an incli- 
nation in the primitive apparatus to drop the distressing memory-picture 
immediately, if anything happens to revive it, for the very reason that if its 
excitation were to overflow into perception it would provoke unpleasure (or, 
more precisely, would begin to provoke it). The avoidance of the memory, 
which is no more than a repetition of the previous flight from the percep- 
tion, is also facilitated by the fact that the memory, unlike the perception, 
does not possess enough quality to excite consciousness and thus to attract 
fresh cathexis to itself. This effortless and regular avoidance by the psychical 
process of the memory of anything that had once been distressing affords us 
the prototype and first example of psychical repression. It is a familiar fact that 
much of this avoidance of what is distressing — this ostrich policy — is still to 
be seen in the normal mental life of adults. 


1 [In his later works Freud speaks of it as the ‘pleasure principle.’] 



E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 


597 


As a result of the unpleasure principle, then, the first ip-system is totally 
incapable of bringing anything disagreeable into the context of its thought. 
It is unable to do anything but wish. If things remained at that point, the 
thought- activity of the second system would be obstructed, since it requires 
free access to all the memories laid down by experience. Two possibilities 
now present themselves. Either the activity of the second system might set 
itself entirely free from the unpleasure principle and proceed without trou- 
bling about the unpleasure of memories; or it might find a method of 
cathecting unpleasurable memories which would enable it to avoid releas- 
ing the unpleasure. We may dismiss the first of these possibilities, for the 
unpleasure principle clearly regulates the course of excitation in the second 
system as much as in the first. We are consequently left with the remaining 
possibility that the second system cathects memories in such a way that 
there is an inhibition of their discharge, including, therefore, an inhibition 
of discharge (comparable to that of a motor innervation) in the direction 
of the development of unpleasure. We have therefore been led from two di- 
rections to the hypothesis that cathexis by the second system implies a si- 
multaneous inhibition of the discharge of excitations: we have been led to 
it by regard for the unpleasure principle and also [as was shown in the last 
paragraph but one] by the principle of the least expenditure of innervation. 
Let us bear this firmly in mind, for it is the key to the whole theory of re- 
pression: the second system can only cathect an idea if it is in a position to in- 
hibit any development of unpleasure that may proceed from it. Anything that 
could evade that inhibition would be inaccessible to the second system as 
well as to the first; for it would prompdy be dropped in obedience to the 
unpleasure principle. The inhibition of unpleasure need not, however, be a 
complete one: a beginning of it must be allowed, since that is what informs 
the second system of the nature of the memory concerned and of its possi- 
ble unsuitability for the purpose which the thought-process has in view. 

I propose to describe the psychical process of which the first system 
alone admits the ‘primary process,’ and the process which results from the 
inhibition imposed by the second system as the ‘secondary process .’ 1 


1 [The distinction between the primary and secondary systems, and the hypothe- 
sis that psychical functioning operates differently in them, are among the most 
fundamental of Freud’s concepts. They are associated with the theory (indicated 
on pp. 595 f. and at the opening of the next Section) that psychical energy oc- 
curs in two forms: ‘free’ or ‘mobile’ (as it occurs in the system Ucs.) and ‘bound’ 
or ‘quiescent’ (as it occurs in the system Pcs.). Where Freud discusses this subject 




598 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


There is yet another reason for which, as I can show, the second sys- 
tem is obliged to correct the primary process. The primary process en- 
deavours to bring about a discharge of excitation in order that, with the 
help of the amount of excitation thus accumulated, it may establish a 
‘perceptual identity’ [with the experience of satisfaction (see pp. 564-5)]. 
The secondary process, however, has abandoned this intention and taken 
on another in its place — the establishment of a ‘thought identity’ [with 
that experience] . All thinking is no more than a circuitous path from the 
memory of a satisfaction (a memory which has been adopted as a purpo- 
sive idea) to an identical cathexis of the same memory which it is hoped 
to attain once more through an intermediate stage of motor experiences. 
Thinking must concern itself with the connecting paths between ideas, 
without being led astray by the intensities of those ideas. But it is obvious 
that condensations of ideas, as well as intermediate and compromise 
structures, must obstruct the attainment of the identity aimed at. Since 
they substitute one idea for another, they cause a deviation from the path 
which would have led on from the first idea. Processes of this kind are 
therefore scrupulously avoided in secondary thinking. It is easy to see, 
too, that the unpleasure principle, which in other respects supplies the 
thought-process with its most important signposts, puts difficulties in its 
path towards establishing ‘thought identity.’ Accordingly, thinking must 
aim at freeing itself more and more from exclusive regulation by the un- 
pleasure principle and at restricting the development of affect in thought- 
activity to the minimum required for acting as a signal. 1 The achievement 


in his later writings (e.g. in his paper on ‘The Unconscious,’ 191 5e, end of Sec- 
tion V, and in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 1 920g, Chapter IV) he attributes this 
latter distinction to some statement of Breuer’s in their joint Studies on Hysteria 
(1895). There is some difficulty in identifying any such statement in Brevier’s 
contribution to that work (Chapter III) . The nearest approach to it is a footnote 
near the beginning of Section 2, in which Breuer distinguishes three forms of ner- 
vous energy: ‘a potential energy which rests in the chemical substance of the cell,’ 
‘a kinetic energy which is discharged when the fibres are in a state of excitation’ 
and ‘yet another quiescent state of nervous excitation: tonic excitation or nervous 
tension.’ On the other hand, the question of ‘bound’ energy is discussed at some 
length towards the end of the first section of Part III of Freud’s ‘Project’ (1950<d, 
written only a few months after the publication of the Studies on Hysteria.\ 

1 [This idea of a small amount of unpleasure acting as a ‘signal’ to prevent the oc- 
currence of a much larger amount was taken up by Freud many years later and 
applied to the problem of anxiety. See Freud, 1 92 6d, Chapter XI, Section A [b).\ 




E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 


599 


of this greater delicacy in functioning is aimed at by means of a further 
hypercathexis, brought about by consciousness. [See below, pp. 610 f£] 
As we well know, however, that aim is seldom attained completely, even 
in normal mental life, and our thinking always remains exposed to falsi- 
fication by interference from the unpleasure principle. 

This, however, is not the gap in the functional efficiency of our mental 
apparatus which makes it possible for thoughts, which represent them- 
selves as products of the secondary thought-activity, to become subject to 
the primary psychical process — for such is the formula in which we can 
now describe the activity which leads to dreams and to hysterical symp- 
toms. Inefficiency arises from the convergence of two factors derived from 
our developmental history. One of these factors devolves entirely upon 
the mental apparatus and has had a decisive influence on the relation be- 
tween the two systems, while the other makes itself felt to a variable de- 
gree and introduces instinctual forces of organic origin into mental life. 
Both of them originate in childhood and are a precipitate of the modifi- 
cations undergone by our mental and somatic organism since our infancy. 

When I described one of the psychical processes occurring in the men- 
tal apparatus as the ‘primary’ one, what I had in mind was not merely con- 
siderations of relative importance and efficiency; I intended also to choose 
a name which would give an indication of its chronological priority. It is 
true that, so far as we know, no psychical apparatus exists which possesses 
a primary process only and that such an apparatus is to that extent a theo- 
retical fiction. But this much is a fact: the primary processes are present in 
the mental apparatus from the first, while it is only during the course of 
life that the secondary processes unfold, and come to inhibit and overlay 
the primary ones; it may even be that their complete domination is not at- 
tained until the prime of life. In consequence of the belated appearance of 
the secondary processes, the core of our being, consisting of unconscious 
wishful impulses, remains inaccessible to the understanding and inhibition 
of the preconscious; the part played by the latter is restricted once and for 
all to directing along the most expedient paths the wishful impulses that 
arise from the unconscious. These unconscious wishes exercise a com- 
pelling force upon all later mental trends, a force which those trends are 
obliged to fall in with or which they may perhaps endeavour to divert and 
direct to higher aims. A further result of the belated appearance of the sec- 
ondary process is that a wide sphere of mnemic material is inaccessible to 
preconscious cathexis. 



600 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


Among these wishful impulses derived from infancy, which can nei- 
ther be destroyed nor inhibited, there are some whose fulfilment would 
be a contradiction of the purposive ideas of secondary thinking. The ful- 
filment of these wishes would no longer generate an affect of pleasure but 
of unpleasure; and it is precisely this transformation of affect which consti- 
tutes the essence of ivhat we term ‘ repression .’ The problem of repression lies 
in the question of how it is and owing to what motive forces that this 
transformation occurs; but it is a problem that we need only touch upon 
here . 1 It is enough for us to be clear that a transformation of this kind 
does occur in the course of development — we have only to recall the way 
in which disgust emerges in childhood after having been absent to begin 
with — and that it is related to the activity of the secondary system. The 
memories on the basis of which the unconscious wish brings about the 
release of affect were never accessible to the Pcs., and consequently the re- 
lease of the affect attaching to those memories cannot be inhibited either. 
It is for the very reason of this generation of affect that these ideas are now 
inaccessible even by way of the preconscious thoughts on to which they 
have transferred their wishful force. On the contrary, the unpleasure prin- 
ciple takes control and causes the Pcs. to turn away from the transference 
thought. They are left to themselves — ‘repressed’ — and thus it is that the 
presence of a store of infantile memories, which has from the first been 
held back from the Pcs., becomes a sine qua non of repression. 

In the most favourable cases the generation of unpleasure ceases along 
with the withdrawal of cathexis from the transference thoughts in the Pcs.; 
and this outcome signifies that the intervention of the unpleasure principle 
has served a useful purpose. But it is another matter when the repressed 
unconscious wish receives an organic reinforcement, which it passes on to 
its transference thoughts; in that way it may place them in a position to 
make an attempt at forcing their way through with their excitation, even 
if they have lost their cathexis from the Pcs. There then follows a defensive 
struggle — for the Pcs. in turn reinforces its opposition to the repressed 
thoughts (i.e. produces an ‘anticathexis’) — and thereafter the transference 
thoughts, which are the vehicles of the unconscious wish, force their way 
through in some form of compromise which is reached by the production 
of a symptom. But from the moment at which the repressed thoughts are 


1 [The subject was afterwards dealt with by Freud at much greater length in his 
paper on ‘Repression’ (1915 d)\ his later views on the subject are given in Lecture 
XXXII of his New Introductory Lectures (1933a).] 




E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 


601 


strongly cathected by the unconscious wishful impulse and, on the other 
hand, abandoned by the preconscious cathexis, they become subject to the 
primary psychical process and their one aim is motor discharge or, if 
the path is open, hallucinatory revival of the desired perceptual identity. 
We have already found empirically that the irrational processes we have 
described are only carried out with thoughts that are under repression. We 
can now see our way a little further into the whole position. The irrational 
processes which occur in the psychical apparatus are the primary ones. 
They appear wherever ideas are abandoned by the preconscious cathexis, 
are left to themselves and can become charged with the uninhibited energy 
from the unconscious which is striving to find an outlet. Some other 
observations lend support to the view that these processes which are de- 
scribed as irrational are not in fact falsifications of normal processes — 
intellectual errors — but are modes of activity of the psychical apparatus 
that have been freed from an inhibition. Thus we find that the transition 
from preconscious excitation to movement is governed by the same pro- 
cesses, and that the linking of preconscious ideas to words may easily ex- 
hibit the same displacements and confusions, which are then attributed to 
inattention. Evidence, finally, of the increase in activity which becomes 
necessary when these primary modes of functioning are inhibited is to be 
found in the fact that we produce a comic effect, that is, a surplus of energy 
which has to be discharged in laughter, if we allow these modes of thinking 
to force their way through into consciousness . 1 

The theory of the psychoneuroses asserts as an indisputable and invari- 
able fact that only sexual wishful impulses from infancy, which have un- 
dergone repression (i.e. a transformation of their affect) during the 
developmental period of childhood, are capable of being revived during 
later developmental periods (whether as a result of the subject’s sexual 
constitution, which is derived from an initial bisexuality, or as a result of 
unfavourable influences acting upon the course of his sexual life) and are 
thus able to furnish the motive force for the formation of psychoneurotic 
symptoms of every kind . 2 It is only by reference to these sexual forces that 
we can close the gaps that are still patent in the theory of repression. I will 


1 [This topic was dealt with by Freud at greater length in Chapter V of his book 
on jokes (1905c). The question of intellectual errors was discussed more fully in 
the closing pages of the ‘Project’ (1950<?).] 

2 The theme of this sentence was elaborated by Freud in his Three Essays on the 
Theory of Sexuality (1905c/).] 




602 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


leave it an open question whether these sexual and infantile factors are 
equally required in the theory of dreams : I will leave that theory incom- 
plete at this point, since I have already gone a step beyond what can be 
demonstrated in assuming that dream-wishes are invariably derived from 
the unconscious. 1 Nor do 1 propose to enquire further into the nature of 
the distinction between the play of psychical forces in the formation of 
dreams and in that of hysterical symptoms: we are still without a suffi- 
ciently accurate knowledge of one of the two objects of the comparison. 

There is, however, another point to which 1 attach importance; and I 
must confess that it is solely on its account that I have embarked here 


1 Here and elsewhere I have intentionally left gaps in the treatment of my theme 
because to fill them would on the one hand require too great an effort and on 
the other would involve my basing myself on material that is alien to the subject 
of dreams. For instance, I have omitted to state whether I attribute different 
meanings to the words ‘suppressed’ and ‘repressed.’ It should have been clear, 
however, that the latter lays more stress than the former upon the fact of attach- 
ment to the unconscious. Nor have I entered into the obvious problem of why 
the dream- thoughts are subjected to distortion by the censorship even in cases 
where they have abandoned the progressive path towards consciousness and have 
chosen the regressive one. And there are many similar omissions. What I was 
above all anxious to do was to create an impression of the problems to which a 
further analysis of the dream-work must lead and to give a hint of the other top- 
ics with which that further analysis would come into contact. It has not always 
been easy for me to decide the point at which to break off my pursuit of this line 
of exposition. — There are special reasons, which may not be what my readers ex- 
pect, why I have not given any exhaustive treatment to the part played in dreams 
by the world of sexual ideas and why I have avoided analysing dreams of obvi- 
ously sexual content. Nothing could be further from my own views or from the 
theoretical opinions which I hold in neuropathology than to regard sexual life as 
something shameful, with which neither a physician nor a scientific research 
worker has any concern. Moreover, the moral indignation by which the transla- 
tor of the Oneirocritica of Artemidorus of Daldis allowed himself to be led into 
withholding the chapter on sexual dreams from the knowledge of his readers 
strikes me as laughable. What governed my decision was simply my seeing that 
an explanation of sexual dreams would involve me deeply in the still unsolved 
problems of perversion and bisexuality; and I accordingly reserved this material 
for another occasion. [It should perhaps be added that the translator of Oneiro- 
critica, F. S. Krauss, himself subsequently published the omitted chapter in his 
periodical Anthropophyteia, from which Freud has quoted above (p. 368 n.) and 
of which he speaks so highly elsewhere (1910/'and 1913£).] 




E. The Primary and Secondary Processes 


603 


upon all these discussions of the two psychical systems and their modes of 
activity and of repression. It is not now a question of whether I have 
formed an approximately correct opinion of the psychological factors with 
which we are concerned, or whether, which is quite possible in such diffi- 
cult matters, my picture of them is distorted and incomplete. However 
many changes may be made in our reading of the psychical censorship and 
of the rational and abnormal revisions made of the dream-content, it re- 
mains true that processes of this sort are at work in the formation of 
dreams and that they show the closest analogy in their essentials to the 
processes observable in the formation of hysterical symptoms. A dream, 
however, is no pathological phenomenon; it presupposes no disturbance 
of psychical equilibrium; it leaves behind it no loss of efficiency. The sug- 
gestion may be made that no conclusions as to the dreams of normal 
people can be drawn from my dreams or those of my patients; but this, I 
think, is an objection which can be safely disregarded. If, then, we may ar- 
gue back from the phenomena to their motive forces, we must recognize 
that the psychical mechanism employed by neuroses is not created by the 
impact of a pathological disturbance upon the mind but is present already 
in the normal structure of the mental apparatus. The two psychical sys- 
tems, the censorship upon the passage from one of them to the other, the 
inhibition and overlaying of one activity by the other, the relations of both 
of them to consciousness — or whatever more correct interpretations of the 
observed facts may take their place — all of these form part of the normal 
structure of our mental instrument, and dreams show us one of the paths 
leading to an understanding of its structure. If we restrict ourselves to the 
minimum of new knowledge which has been established with certainty, we 
can still say this of dreams: they have proved that what is suppressed contin- 
ues to exist in normal people as ivell as abnormal, arid remains capable of psy- 
chical functioning. Dreams themselves are among the manifestations of this 
suppressed material; this is so theoretically in every case, and it can be ob- 
served empirically in a great number of cases at least, and precisely in cases 
which exhibit most clearly the striking peculiarities of dream-life. In wak- 
ing life the suppressed material in the mind is prevented from finding ex- 
pression and is cut off from internal perception owing to the fact that the 
contradictions present in it are eliminated — one side being disposed of in 
favour of the other; but during the night, under the sway of an impetus 
towards the construction of compromises, this suppressed material finds 
methods and means of forcing its way into consciousness. 



604 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo . 1 

The interpretation of dreams is the royal road to a knowledge of the un- 
conscious activities of the mind. 

By analysing dreams we can take a step forward in our understanding 
of the composition of that most marvellous and most mysterious of all in- 
struments. Only a small step, no doubt; but a beginning. And this begin- 
ning will enable us to proceed further with its analysis, on the basis of 
other structures which must be termed pathological. For illnesses — those, 
at least, which are rightly named ‘functional’ — do not presuppose the dis- 
integration of the apparatus or the production of fresh splits in its interior. 
They are to be explained on a dynamic basis — by the strengthening and 
weakening of the various components in the interplay of forces, so many 
of whose effects are hidden from view while functions are normal. I hope 
to be able to show elsewhere how the compounding of the apparatus out 
of two agencies makes it possible for the normal mind too to function with 
greater delicacy than would be possible with only one of them . 2 


1 [‘If I cannot bend the Higher Powers, I will move the Infernal Regions.’ Freud 
remarks in a note in Ges. Schr., 3 (1925), 169, that this line of Virgil [Aeneid, 
VII, 312] is intended to picture the efforts of the repressed instinctual impulses.’ 
He has used the same line as the motto for the whole volume. In a letter to Fliess 
of December 4, 1896 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 51) he proposed using it as a motto 
for a chapter on ‘Symptom Formation’ in some projected but unrealized 
work. — The next sentence was added in 1909. It was included in the same year 
in the third of his lectures at Clark University (Freud, 1910a).] 

2 Dreams are not the only phenomena which allow us to find a basis for psy- 
chopathology in psychology. In a short series of papers (1898/) and 1899a) 
which is not yet completed, I have attempted to interpret a number of phenom- 
ena of daily life as evidence in favour of the same conclusions. [Added 1909:] 
These, together with some further papers on forgetting, slips of the tongue, bun- 
gled actions, etc., have since been collected under the title of The Psychopathology 
of Everyday Life (Freud, 1901 b). 




F. The Unconscious and Consciousness 


605 


(F) 

THE UNCONSCIOUS AND CONSCIOUSNESS- 
REALITY 

It will be seen on closer consideration that what the psychological discus- 
sion in the preceding sections invites us to assume is not the existence of two 
systems near the motor end of the apparatus but the existence of two kinds 
of processes of excitation or modes of its discharge. It is all one to us, for we must 
always be prepared to drop our conceptual scaffolding if we feel that we are 
in a position to replace it by something that approximates more closely to 
the unknown reality. So let us try to correct some conceptions which might 
be misleading so long as we looked upon the two systems in the most literal 
and crudest sense as two localities in the mental apparatus — conceptions 
which have left their traces in the expressions ‘to repress’ and ‘to force a way 
through.’ Thus, we may speak of an unconscious thought seeking to convey 
itself into the preconscious so as to be able then to force its way through into 
consciousness. What we have in mind here is not the forming of a second 
thought situated in a new place, like a transcription which continues to exist 
alongside the original; and the notion of forcing a way through into con- 
sciousness must be kept carefully free from any idea of a change of locality. 
Again, we may speak of a preconscious thought being repressed or driven 
out and then taken over by the unconscious. These images, derived from a 
set of ideas relating to a struggle for a piece of ground, may tempt us to sup- 
pose that it is literally true that a mental grouping in one locality has been 
brought to an end and replaced by a fresh one in another locality. Let us re- 
place these metaphors by something that seems to correspond better to the 
real state of affairs, and let us say instead that some particular mental group- 
ing has had a cathexis of energy attached to it or withdrawn from it, so that 
the structure in question has come under the sway of a particular agency or 
been withdrawn from it. What we are doing here is once again to replace a 
topographical way of representing things by a dynamic one. What we regard 
as mobile is not the psychical structure itself but its innervation . 1 


1 [ Footnote added 1 925:] It became necessary to elaborate and modify this view af- 
ter it was recognized that the essential feature of a preconscious idea was the fact 




606 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


Nevertheless, I consider it expedient and justifiable to continue to 
make use of the figurative image of the two systems. We can avoid any 
possible abuse of this method of representation by recollecting that ideas, 
thoughts and psychical structures in general must never be regarded as lo- 
calized in organic elements of the nervous system but rather, as one might 
say, between them, where resistances and facilitations [ Bahnungen ] provide 
the corresponding correlates. Everything that can be an object of our in- 
ternal perception is virtual, like the image produced in a telescope by the 
passage of light-rays. But we are justified in assuming the existence of the 
systems (which are not in any way psychical entities themselves and can 
never be accessible to our psychical perception) like the lenses of the tele- 
scope, which cast the image. And, if we pursue this analogy, we may com- 
pare the censorship between two systems to the refraction which takes 
place when a ray of light passes into a new medium. 

So far we have been psychologizing on our own account. It is time now 
to consider the theoretical views which govern present-day psychology and 
to examine their relation to our hypotheses. The problem of the uncon- 
scious in psychology is, in the forcible words of Lipps (1897), less a psy- 
chological problem than the problem of psychology. So long as psychology 
dealt with this problem by a verbal explanation to the effect that ‘psychical’ 
meant ‘conscious’ and that to speak of ‘unconscious psychical processes’ 
was palpable nonsense, any psychological evaluation of the observations 
made by physicians upon abnormal mental states was out of the question. 
The physician and the philosopher can only come together if they both 
recognize that the term ‘unconscious psychical processes’ is ‘the appropriate 
and justified expression of a solidly established fact.’ The physician can 
only shrug his shoulders when he is assured that ‘consciousness is an indis- 
pensable characteristic of what is psychical,’ and perhaps, if he still feels 
enough respect for the utterances of philosophers, he may presume that 
they have not been dealing with the same thing or working at the same 
science. For even a single understanding observation of a neurotic’s mental 
life or a single analysis of a dream must leave him with an unshakable con- 
viction that the most complicated and most rational thought-processes, 


of its being connected with the residues of verbal presentations. Cf. ‘The Un- 
conscious’ (1915e, [Section VII]). [As is there pointed out, however, this was al- 
ready indicated in the first edition of the present work. (See pp. 573 and 
612.) — For the use of the word ‘innervation’ cf. p. 539 n.\ 




F. The Unconscious and Consciousness 


607 


which can surely not be denied the name of psychical processes, can occur 
without exciting the subject’s consciousness. 1 It is true that the physician 
cannot learn of these unconscious processes until they have produced some 
effect upon consciousness which can be communicated or observed. But 
this conscious effect may exhibit a psychical character quite different from 
that of the unconscious process, so that internal perception cannot possibly 
regard the one as a substitute for the other. The physician must feel at lib- 
erty to proceed by inference from the conscious effect to the unconscious 
psychical process. He thus learns that the conscious effect is only a remote 
psychical result of the unconscious process and that the latter has not be- 
come conscious as such; and moreover that the latter was present and op- 
erative even without betraying its existence in any way to consciousness. 

It is essential to abandon the overvaluation of the property of being con- 
scious before it becomes possible to form any correct view of the origin of 
what is mental. In Lipps’s words [1897, 146 £], the unconscious must be as- 
sumed to be the general basis of psychical life. The unconscious is the larger 
sphere, which includes within it the smaller sphere of the conscious. Every- 
thing conscious has an unconscious preliminary stage; whereas what is un- 
conscious may remain at that stage and nevertheless claim to be regarded as 
having the full value of a psychical process. The unconscious is the true psy- 
chical reality; in its innermost nature it is as much unknown to us as the reality 
of the external ivorld, and it is as incompletely presented by the data of conscious- 
ness as is the external ivorld by the communications of our sense organs. 

Now that the old antithesis between conscious life and dream-life has 
been reduced to its proper proportions by the establishment of uncon- 
scious psychical reality, a number of dream-problems with which earlier 
writers were deeply concerned have lost their significance. Thus some of 
the activities whose successful performance in dreams excited astonishment 
are now no longer to be attributed to dreams but to unconscious thinking, 

1 [ Footnote added 1914:] I am happy to be able to point to an author who has 
drawn from the study of dreams the same conclusions as I have on the relation 
between conscious and unconscious activity. Du Prel (1885, 47) writes: 'The 
problem of the nature of the mind evidently calls for a preliminary investigation 
as to whether consciousness and mind are identical. This preliminary question is 
answered in the negative by dreams, which show that the concept of the mind is 
a wider one than that of consciousness, in the same kind of way in which the 
gravitational force of a heavenly body extends beyond its range of luminosity.’ 
And again (ibid., 306 [quoting Maudsley, 1868, 15]): ‘It is a truth which cannot 
be too distinctly borne in mind that consciousness is not co-extensive with mind.’ 




608 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


which is active during the day no less than at night. If, as Schemer [1861, 
114 £] has said, dreams appear to engage in making symbolic representa- 
tions of the body [p. 1 1 1], we now know that those representations are the 
product of certain unconscious phantasies (deriving, probably, from sexual 
impulses) which find expression not only in dreams but also in hysterical 
phobias and other symptoms. If a dream carries on the activities of the day 
and completes them and even brings valuable fresh ideas to light, all we 
need do is to strip it of the dream disguise, which is the product of dream- 
work and the mark of assistance rendered by obscure forces from the 
depths of the mind (cf. the Devil in Tartini’s sonata dream); 1 the intellec- 
tual achievement is due to the same mental forces which produce every 
similar result during the daytime. We are probably inclined greatly to over- 
estimate the conscious character of intellectual and artistic production as 
well. Accounts given us by some of the most highly productive men, such 
as Goethe and Helmholtz, show rather that what is essential and new in 
their creations came to them without premeditation and as an almost 
ready-made whole. There is nothing strange if in other cases, where a con- 
centration of every intellectual faculty was needed, conscious activity also 
contributed its share. But it is the much-abused privilege of conscious ac- 
tivity, wherever it plays a part, to conceal every other activity from our eyes. 

It would scarcely repay the trouble if we were to treat the historical 
significance of dreams as a separate topic. A dream may have impelled some 
chieftain to embark upon a bold enterprise the success of which has 
changed history. But this only raises a fresh problem so long as a dream is 
regarded as an alien power in contrast to the other more familiar forces of 
the mind; no such problem remains if a dream is recognized as a form of ex- 
pression of impulses which are under the pressure of resistance during the 
day but which have been able to find reinforcement during the night from 
deep-lying sources of excitation. 2 The respect paid to dreams in antiquity 
is, however, based upon correct psychological insight and is the homage 


1 [Tartini, the composer and violinist (1692-1770), is said to have dreamt that he 
sold his soul to the devil, who thereupon seized a violin and played a sonata of 
exquisite beauty upon it with consummate skill. When the composer awoke he 
at once wrote down what he could recollect of it, and the result was his famous 
‘Trillo del Diavolo.’] 

1 \Footnote added 1911:] Cf. in this connection Alexander the Great’s dream dur- 
ing his siege of Tyre (oA-xupog). [See p. 131 n. 2.] 




F. The Unconscious and Consciousness 


609 


paid to the uncontrolled and indestructible forces in the human mind, to 
the ‘daemonic’ power which produces the dream-wish and which we find 
at work in our unconscious. 

It is not without intention that I speak of ‘our’ unconscious. For what I 
thus describe is not the same as the unconscious of the philosophers or even 
the unconscious of Lipps. By them the term is used merely to indicate a con- 
trast with the conscious: the thesis which they dispute with so much heat 
and defend with so much energy is the thesis that apart from conscious there 
are also unconscious psychical processes. Lipps carries things further with his 
assertion that the whole of what is psychical exists unconsciously and that a 
part of it also exists consciously. But it is not in order to establish this thesis 
that we have summoned up the phenomena of dreams and of the formation 
of hysterical symptoms; the observation of normal waking life would by it- 
self suffice to prove it beyond any doubt. The new discovery that we have 
been taught by the analysis of psychopathological structures and of the first 
member of that class — the dream — lies in the fact that the unconscious (that 
is, the psychical) is found as a function of two separate systems and that this 
is the case in normal as well as in pathological life. Thus there are two kinds 
of unconscious, which have not yet been distinguished by psychologists. 
Both of them are unconscious in the sense used by psychology; but in our 
sense one of them, which we term the Ucs., is also inadmissible to conscious- 
ness, while we term the other the Pcs. because its excitations — after observing 
certain rules, it is true, and perhaps only after passing a fresh censorship, 
though nonetheless without regard to the Ucs . — are able to reach conscious- 
ness. The fact that excitations in order to reach consciousness must pass 
through a fixed series or hierarchy of agencies (which is revealed to us by the 
modifications made in them by censorship) has enabled us to construct a 
spatial analogy. We have described the relations of the two systems to each 
other and to consciousness by saying that the system Pcs. stands like a screen 
between the system Ucs. and consciousness. The system Pcs. not merely bars 
access to consciousness, it also controls access to the power of voluntary 
movement and has at its disposal for distribution a mobile cathectic energy, 
a part of which is familiar to us in the form of attention. 1 [See p. 598.] 

1 [ Footnote added 1914:] Cf. my ‘Remarks on the Concept of the Unconscious in 
Psycho-Analysis’ (Freud, 1912 g), first published in English in the Proceedings of 
the Society for Psychical Research, 26 [312], in which I have distinguished the 
descriptive, dynamic and systematic meanings of the highly ambiguous word 
‘unconscious.’ [The whole topic is discussed in the light of Freud’s later views in 
Chapter II of The Ego and the Id (1923^).] 




610 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 

We must avoid, too, the distinction between ‘supraconscious’ and 
‘subconscious,’ which has become so popular in the more recent literature 
of the psychoneuroses, for such a distinction seems precisely calculated to 
stress the equivalence of what is psychical to what is conscious. 

But what part is there left to be played in our scheme by conscious- 
ness, which was once so omnipotent and hid all else from view? Only that 
of a sense-organ for the preception of psychical qualities. 1 In accordance with 
the ideas underlying our attempt at a schematic picture, we can only re- 
gard conscious perception as the function proper to a particular system; 
and for this the abbreviation Cs. seems appropriate. In its mechanical 
properties we regard this system as resembling the perceptual systems 
Pcpt.: as being susceptible to excitation by qualities but incapable of re- 
taining traces of alterations — that is to say, as having no memory. The 
psychical apparatus, which is turned towards the external world with its 
sense-organ of the Pcpt. systems, is itself the external world in relation to 
the sense-organ of the Cs., whose teleological justification resides in this 
circumstance. Here we once more meet the principle of the hierarchy of 
agencies, which seems to govern the structure of the apparatus. Excitatory 
material flows in to the Cs. sense-organ from two directions: from the 
Pcpt. system, whose excitation, determined by qualities, is probably sub- 
mitted to a fresh revision before it becomes a conscious sensation, and 
from the interior of the apparatus itself, whose quantitative processes are 
felt qualitatively in the pleasure-unpleasure series when, subject to certain 
modifications, they make their way to consciousness. 

Those philosophers who have become aware that rational and highly 
complex thought-structures are possible without consciousness playing any 
part in them have found difficulty in assigning any function to conscious- 
ness; it has seemed to them that it can be no more than a superfluous re- 
flected picture of the completed psychical process. We, on the other hand, 
are rescued from this embarrassment by the analogy between our Cs. sys- 
tem and the perceptual systems. We know that perception by our sense- 
organs has the result of directing a cathexis of attention to the paths along 
which the in-coming sensory excitation is spreading: the qualitative excita- 
tion of the Pcpt. system acts as a regulator of the discharge of the mobile 


1 [Freud’s use of the terms ‘quantity’ and ‘quality’ is fully explained in Part I of 
his ‘Project’ (1950a).] 




F. The Unconscious and Consciousness 


611 


quantity in the psychical apparatus. We can attribute the same function to 
the overlying sense-organ of the Cs. system. By perceiving new qualities, it 
makes a new contribution to directing the mobile quantities of cathexis 
and distributing them in an expedient fashion. By the help of its percep- 
tion of pleasure and unpleasure it influences the discharge of the cathexes 
within what is otherwise an unconscious apparatus operating by means of 
the displacement of quantities. It seems probable that in the first instance 
the unpleasure principle regulates the displacement of cathexes automati- 
cally. But it is quite possible that consciousness of these qualities may in- 
troduce in addition a second and more discriminating regulation, which is 
even able to oppose the former one, and which perfects the efficiency of 
the apparatus by enabling it, in contradiction to its original plan, to cathect 
and work over what is associated with the release of unpleasure. We learn 
from the psychology of the neuroses that these processes of regulation car- 
ried out by the qualitative excitation of the sense organs play a great part 
in the functional activity of the apparatus. The automatic domination of 
the primary unpleasure principle and the consequent restriction imposed 
upon efficiency are interrupted by the processes of sensory regulation, 
which are themselves in turn automatic in action. We find that repression 
(which, though it served a useful purpose to begin with, leads ultimately 
to a damaging loss of inhibition and mental control) affects memories so 
much more easily than perceptions because the former can receive no extra 
cathexis from the excitation of the psychical sense organs. It is true on the 
one hand that a thought which has to be warded off cannot become con- 
scious, because it has undergone repression; but on the other hand it some- 
times happens that a thought of this kind is only repressed because for 
other reasons it has been withdrawn from conscious perception. Here are 
some hints of which we take advantage in our therapeutic procedure in or- 
der to undo repressions which have already been effected. 

The value of the hypercathexis which is set up in the mobile quantities 
by the regulating influence of the sense organ of the Cs. cannot be better 
illustrated in its teleological aspect than by the fact of its creation of a new 
series of qualities and consequently of a new process of regulation which 
constitutes the superiority of men over animals. Thought-processes are in 
themselves without quality, except for the pleasurable and unpleasurable 
excitations which accompany them, and which, in view of their possible 
disturbing effect upon thinking, must be kept within bounds. In order 
that thought-processes may acquire quality, they are associated in human 
beings with verbal memories, whose residues of quality are sufficient to 



612 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


draw the attention of consciousness to them and to endow the process of 
thinking with a new mobile cathexis from consciousness. [Cf. pp. 573 
and 605 n.\ 

The whole multiplicity of the problems of consciousness can only be 
grasped by an analysis of the thought-processes in hysteria. These give one 
the impression that the transition from a preconscious to a conscious 
cathexis is marked by a censorship similar to that between the Ucs. and the 
Pcs . 1 This censorship, too, only comes into force above a certain quan- 
titative limit, so that thought-structures of low intensity escape it. Exam- 
ples of every possible variety of how a thought can be withheld from 
consciousness or can force its way into consciousness under certain limita- 
tions are to be found included within the framework of psychoneurotic 
phenomena; and they all point to the intimate and reciprocal relations be- 
tween censorship and consciousness. I will bring these psychological reflec- 
tions to an end with a report of two such examples. 

I was called in to a consultation last year to examine an intelligent and 
unembarrassed-looking girl. She was most surprisingly dressed. For though 
as a rule a woman’s clothes are carefully considered down to the last detail, 
she was wearing one of her stockings hanging down and two of the buttons 
on her blouse were undone. She complained of having pains in her leg and, 
without being asked, exposed her calf. But what she principally complained 
of was, to use her own words, that she had a feeling in her body as though 
there was something ‘stuck into it’ which was ‘moving backwards and for- 
wards’ and was ‘shaking’ her through and through: sometimes it made her 
whole body feel ‘stiff.’ My medical colleague, who was present at the exam- 
ination, looked at me; he found no difficulty in understanding the meaning 
of her complaint. But what struck both of us as extraordinary was the fact 
that it meant nothing to the patient’s mother — though she must often have 
found herself in the situation which her child was describing. The girl her- 
self had no notion of the bearing of her remarks; for if she had, she would 
never have given voice to them. In this case it had been possible to hood- 
wink the censorship into allowing a phantasy which would normally have 
been kept in the preconscious to emerge into consciousness under the in- 
nocent disguise of making a complaint. 


1 [The censorship between the Pcs. and the Cs. appears only rarely in Freud’s later 
writings. It is, however, discussed at length in Section VI of his paper on ‘The 
Unconscious’ (1915c).] 




F. The Unconscious and Consciousness 


613 


Here is another example. A fourteen-year-old boy came to me for 
psycho-analytic treatment suffering from tic convulsif, hysterical vomiting, 
headaches, etc. I began the treatment by assuring him that if he shut his 
eyes he would see pictures or have ideas, which he was then to communi- 
cate to me. He replied in pictures. His last impression before coming to me 
was revived visually in his memory. He had been playing at draughts with 
his uncle and saw the board in front of him. He thought of various posi- 
tions, favourable or unfavourable, and of moves that one must not make. 
He then saw a dagger lying on the board — an object that belonged to his 
father but which his imagination placed on the board. Then there was a 
sickle lying on the board and next a scythe. And there now appeared a pic- 
ture of an old peasant mowing the grass in front of the patient’s distant 
home with a scythe. After a few days I discovered the meaning of this series 
of pictures. The boy had been upset by an unhappy family situation. He 
had a father who was a hard man, liable to fits of rage, who had been un- 
happily married to the patient’s mother, and whose educational methods 
had consisted of threats. His father had been divorced from his mother, 
a tender and affectionate woman, had married again and had one day 
brought a young woman home with him who was to be the boy’s new 
mother. It was during the first few days after this that the fourteen-year-old 
boy’s illness had come on. His suppressed rage against his father was what 
had constructed this series of pictures with their understandable allusions. 
The material for them was provided by a recollection from mythology. The 
sickle was the one with which Zeus castrated his father; the scythe and the 
picture of the old peasant represented Kronos, the violent old man who 
devoured his children and on whom Zeus took such unfilial vengeance. 
[See p. 274.] His father’s marriage gave the boy an opportunity of repaying 
the reproaches and threats which he had heard from his father long before 
because he had played with his genitals. (Cf. the playing at draughts; the 
forbidden moves; the dagger which could be used to kill.) In this case long- 
repressed memories and derivatives from them which had remained un- 
conscious slipped into consciousness by a roundabout path in the form of 
apparently meaningless pictures. 

Thus I would look for the theoretical value of the study of dreams in the 
contributions it makes to psychological knowledge and in the preliminary 
light it throws on the problems of the psychoneuroses. Who can guess the 
importance of the results which might be obtained from a thorough un- 
derstanding of the structure and functions of the mental apparatus, since 



614 


VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes 


even the present state of our knowledge allows us to exert a favourable 
therapeutic influence on the curable forms of psychoneurosis? But what of 
the practical value of this study — I hear the question raised — as a means 
towards an understanding of the mind, towards a revelation of the hidden 
characteristics of individual men? Have not the unconscious impulses 
brought out by dreams the importance of real forces in mental life? Is the 
ethical significance of suppressed wishes to be made light of — wishes 
which, just as they lead to dreams, may some day lead to other things? 

I do not feel justified in answering these questions. 1 have not consid- 
ered this side of the problem of dreams further. I think, however, that the 
Roman emperor was in the wrong when he had one of his subjects exe- 
cuted because he had dreamt of murdering the emperor. [See above, p. 
94 £] He should have begun by trying to find out what the dream meant; 
most probably its meaning was not what it appeared to be. And even if a 
dream with another content had had this act of Use majeste as its meaning, 
would it not be right to bear in mind Plato’s dictum that the virtuous man 
is content to dream what a wicked man really does [p. 94 £]? I think it is 
best, therefore, to acquit dreams. Whether we are to attribute reality to un- 
conscious wishes, I cannot say. It must be denied, of course, to any transi- 
tional or intermediate thoughts. If we look at unconscious wishes reduced 
to their most fundamental and truest shape, we shall have to conclude, no 
doubt, that psychical reality is a particular form of existence not to be con- 
fused with material reality. 1 Thus there seems to be no justification for 
people’s reluctance in accepting responsibility for the immorality of their 
dreams. W'hen the mode of functioning of the mental apparatus is rightly 
appreciated and the relation between the conscious and the unconscious 
understood, the greater part of what is ethically objectionable in our 
dream and phantasy lives will be found to disappear. In the words of 
Hanns Sachs [1912, 569]: ‘If we look in our consciousness at something 


1 [This sentence does not appear in the first edition. In 1909 it appeared in the 
following form; ‘If we look at unconscious wishes reduced to their most funda- 
mental and truest shape, we shall have to remember, no doubt, that psychical re- 
ality too has more than one form of existence.’ In 1914 the sentence first 
appeared as printed in the text, except that the last word but one was ‘factual’ 
and not ‘material.’ ‘Material’ was substituted in 1919. — The remainder of this 
paragraph was added in 1914. — Freud had already drawn a distinction between 
‘thought reality’ and ‘external reality’ in the second section of Part III of his 
‘Project’ (1950<?).] 




F. The Unconscious and Consciousness 


615 


that has been told us by a dream about a contemporary (real) situation, we 
ought not to be surprised to find that the monster which we saw under the 
magnifying glass of analysis turns out to be a tiny infusorian.’ 

Actions and consciously expressed opinions are as a rule enough for 
practical purposes in judging men’s characters. Actions deserve to be con- 
sidered first and foremost; for many impulses which force their way 
through to consciousness are even then brought to nothing by the real 
forces of mental life before they can mature into deeds. In fact, such im- 
pulses often meet with no psychical obstacles to their progress, for the 
very reason that the unconscious is certain that they will be stopped at 
some other stage. It is in any case instructive to get to know the much 
trampled soil from which our virtues proudly spring. Very rarely does the 
complexity of a human character, driven hither and thither by dynamic 
forces, submit to a choice between simple alternatives, as our antiquated 
morality would have us believe. 1 

And the value of dreams for giving us knowledge of the future? There 
is of course no question of that. 2 [Cf. p. 39 n.\ It would be truer to say 
instead that they give us knowledge of the past. For dreams are derived 
from the past in every sense. Nevertheless the ancient belief that dreams 
foretell the future is not wholly devoid of truth. By picturing our wishes 
as fulfilled, dreams are after all leading us into the future. But this future, 
which the dreamer pictures as the present, has been moulded by his in- 
destructible wish into a perfect likeness of the past. 


1 [This subject is further discussed in Freud, 19251 (Section B).] 

2 [In the 1911 edition only, the following footnote appeared at this point: ‘Pro- 
fessor Ernst Oppenheim of Vienna has shown me, from the evidence of folklore, 
that there is a class of dreams in which the prophetic meaning has been dropped 
even in popular belief and which are perfectly correctly traced back to wishes 
and needs emerging during sleep. He will shortly be giving a detailed account of 
these dreams, which are as a rule narrated in the form of comic stories.’] 





APPENDIX A 


A PREMONITORY DREAM FULFILLED 1 


Frau B., an estimable woman who moreover possesses a critical sense, 
told me in another connection and without the slightest arriere pensee 
that once some years ago she dreamt she had met Dr. K., a friend and for- 
mer family doctor of hers, in the Karntnerstrasse 2 in front of Hiess’s shop. 
The next morning, while she was walking along the same street, she in 
fact met the person in question at the very spot she had dreamt of. So 
much for my theme. I will only add that no subsequent event proved the 
importance of this miraculous coincidence, which cannot therefore be ac- 
counted for by what lay in the future. 

Analysis of the dream was helped by questioning, which established the 
fact that there was no evidence of her having had any recollection at all of 
the dream on the morning after she dreamt it, until after her walk — 
evidence such as her having written the dream down or told it to someone 


1 [The manuscript of this paper is dated November 10, 1899 — six days after the 
publication of The Interpretation of Dreams. In the same letter to Fliess in which 
Freud announced that event (Freud, 1950<7, Letter 123, of November 5, 1899) 
he remarked that he had just discovered the origin and meaning of premonitory 
dreams. The paper was first published posthumously in Ges. Werke, 17 (1941), 
21. The present English translation (by James Strachey) first appeared in Coll. 
Papers, 5 (1950), 70. — The same incident was reported by Freud very much 
more briefly in his Psychopathology of Everyday Life (190l£), Chapter XII, Sec- 
tion D. — The topic of premonitory dreams is touched upon in The Interpreta- 
tion of Dreams on pp. 97 and 659.] 

2 [The principal shopping-street in the centre of Vienna.] 


617 




618 


Appendix A 


before it was fulfilled. On the contrary, she was obliged to accept the fol- 
lowing account of what happened, which seems to me more plausible, 
without raising any objection to it. She was walking along the Karntners- 
trasse one morning and met her old family doctor in front of Hiess’s shop. 
On seeing him she felt convinced that she had dreamt the night before of 
having this very meeting at that precise spot. According to the rules that ap- 
ply to the interpretation of neurotic symptoms, her conviction must have 
been justified; its content may, however, require to be re-interpreted. 

The following is an episode with which Dr. K. is connected from Frau 
B.’s earlier life. When she was young she was married, without her whole- 
hearted consent, to an elderly but wealthy man. A few years later he lost 
his money, fell ill of tuberculosis and died. For many years the young 
woman supported herself and her sick husband by giving music lessons. 
Among her friends in misfortune was her family doctor, Dr. K., who de- 
voted himself to looking after her husband and helped her in finding her 
first pupils. Another friend was a barrister, also a Dr. K., who put the 
chaotic affairs of the ruined merchant in order, while at the same time he 
made love to the young woman and — for the first and last time — set her 
passion aflame. This love affair brought her no real happiness, for the scru- 
ples created by her upbringing and her cast of mind interfered with her 
complete surrender while she was married and later when she was a widow. 
In the same connection in which she told me the dream, she also told me 
of a real occurrence dating from this unhappy period of her life, an occur- 
rence which in her opinion was a remarkable coincidence. She was in her 
room, kneeling on the floor with her head buried in a chair and sobbing 
in passionate longing for her friend and helper the barrister, when at that 
very moment the door opened and in he came to visit her. We shall find 
nothing at all remarkable in this coincidence when we consider how often 
she thought of him and how often he probably visited her. Moreover, ac- 
cidents which seem preconcerted like this are to be found in every love 
story. Nevertheless this coincidence was probably the true content of her 
dream and the sole basis of her conviction that it had come true. 

Between the scene in which her wish had been fulfilled and the time of 
the dream more than twenty-five years elapsed. In the meantime Frau B. 
had become the widow of a second husband who left her with a child and 
a fortune. The old lady’s affection was still centred on Dr. K., who was 
now her adviser and the administrator of her estate and whom she saw fre- 
quently. Let us suppose that during the few days before the dream she had 
been expecting a visit from him, but that this had not taken place — he was 



Appendix A 


619 


no longer so pressing as he used to be. She may then have quite well had a 
nostalgic dream one night which took her back to the old days. Her dream 
was probably of a rendez-vous at the time of her love affair, and the chain 
of her dream- thoughts carried her back to the occasion when, without any 
pre-arrangement, he had come in at the very moment at which she had 
been longing for him. She probably had dreams of this kind quite often 
now; they were a part of the belated punishment with which a woman 
pays for her youthful cruelty. But such dreams — derivatives of a sup- 
pressed current of thought, filled with memories of rendez-vous of which, 
since her second marriage, she no longer liked to think — such dreams were 
put aside on waking. And that was what happened to our ostensibly 
prophetic dream. She then went out, and in the Karntnerstrasse, at a spot 
which was in itself indifferent, she met her old family doctor, Dr. K. It was 
a very long time since she had seen him. He was intimately associated with 
the excitements of that happy-unhappy time. He too had been a helper, 
and we may suppose that he had been used in her thoughts, and perhaps 
in her dreams as well, as a screen figure behind which she concealed the 
better-loved figure of the other Dr. K. This meeting now revived her rec- 
ollection of the dream. She must have thought: ‘Yes, I had a dream last 
night of my rendez-vous with Dr. K.’ But this recollection had to undergo 
the distortion which the dream escaped only because it had been com- 
pletely forgotten. She inserted the indifferent K. (who had reminded her 
of the dream) in place of the beloved K. The content of the dream — the 
rendez-vous — was transferred to a belief that she had dreamt of that partic- 
ular spot, for a rendez-vous consists in two people coming to the same spot 
at the same time. And if she then had an impression that a dream had been 
fulfilled, she was only giving effect in that way to her memory of the scene 
in which she had longed in her misery for him to come and her longing 
had at once been fulfilled. 

Thus the creation of a dream after the event, which alone makes pro- 
phetic dreams possible, is nothing other than a form of censoring, thanks 
to which the dream is able to make its way through into consciousness. 


10 Nov. 99 




APPENDIX B 


LIST OF WRITINGS BY FREUD DEALING 
PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY WITH DREAMS 


[It would scarcely be an exaggeration to say that dreams are alluded to in 
the majority of Freud’s writings. The folloiving list of works [of greatly varying 
importance) may however be of some practical use. The date at the beginning 
of each entry is that of the year during which the work in question was writ- 
ten. The date at the end is that of publication; and under that date fuller par- 
ticulars of the work ivill be found in the General Bibliography. The items in 
square brackets were published posthumously :] 

[1895 ‘Project for a Scientific Psychology’ (Sections 19, 20 and 21 of 
Part I). (1950 a.)] 

1899 The Interpretation of Dreams. (1900,2.) 

[1899 ‘A Premonitory Dream Fulfilled.’ (1941c.)] 

1901 On Dreams. (1901,2.) 

1901 ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria.’ [Original title: 
‘Dreams and Hysteria.’] (1905c.) 

1905 Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious Chapter VI). (1905c.) 
1 907 Delusions and Dreams in Jensen ’s ‘ Gradiva . ’ ( 1 907tf .) 

1910 ‘A Typical Example of a Disguised Oedipus Dream.’ (1910/.) 

1911 ‘Additions to the Interpretation of Dreams.’ (191 la.) 

1911 ‘The Handling of Dream-Interpretation in Psycho-Analysis.’ 
(1911c.) 

1913 ‘An Evidential Dream.’ (1913,2.) 


621 



622 


Appendix B 


1913 ‘The Occurrence in Dreams of Material from Fairy Tales.’ 
(1913 d.) 

1913 ‘Observations and Examples from Analytic Practice.’ (1913 hi) 

1914 ‘The Representation in a Dream of a “Great Achievement.’” 
(1914?.) 

1916 Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Part II) . (1916-1917.) 

1917 ‘A Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory of Dreams.’ 
(191 7d.) 

1918 ‘From the History of an Infantile Neurosis’ (Section IV). (1918 b) 
1920 ‘Supplements to the Theory of Dreams.’ (1920 b.) 

1922 ‘Dreams and Telepathy.’ (1922,2.) 

1923 ‘Remarks upon the Theory and Practice of Dream-Interpretation.’ 
(1923c.) 

1923 ‘Josef Popper- Lynkeus and the Theory of Dreams.’ (1923 if.) 

1925 ‘Some Additional Notes on Dream-Interpretation as a Whole.’ 
(1925/.) 

1929 ‘A Letter to Maxime Leroy on a Dream of Descartes.’ [1929 b.) 
1932 ‘My Contact with Josef Popper- Lynkeus.’ (1932c.) 

1932 New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Lectures XXIX and 
XXX). (1933a) 

[1938 An Outline of Psycho-Analysis (Chapter V). (1940a)] 

N.B. — An unauthorized concoction of portions of The Interpretation of 
Dreams and On Dreams has appeared in two editions in America under the 
title of Dream Psychology: Psychoanalysis for Beginners (with an introduction 
by Andre Tridon). New York: McCann, 1920 and 1921. Pp. xi + 237. 



ADDITIONAL NOTES 


194, line 25. ‘Festschrift. ’ This Festschrift was in honour of Professor 
Strieker, Director of the Institute of Pathological Anatomy, at which 
Dr. Gartner was Assistant, and where Freud had worked in his stu- 
dent days. 

447, line 26. The journal in question was the Wiener klinische Rundschau. 
523, line 4. ‘Nineteen.’ In the first edition only (but not in the 1925 
reprint of it) this read ‘seventeen.’ See Jones (1953), 35-6. 

636, line 35. ‘Freud (\950d). Aus den Anfdngen der Psychoanalyse.’ An En- 
glish translation of this work under the title of The Origins of Psycho- 
Analysis appeared in 1954 (London: Imago Publishing Co.). This 
includes the ‘Project for a Scientific Psychology’ written by Freud in 

1895. 


623 



7 


8 


A French Nurse’s Dream 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


[Titles of books and periodicals are in italics; titles of papers are in in- 
verted commas. Abbreviations are in accordance with the World List of Sci- 
entific Periodicals (Oxford, 1950). Numerals in thick type refer to volumes; 
ordinary numerals refer to pages. G.S. = Freud, Gesammelte Schriften (12 
vols.), Vienna, 1924-34. G.W. = Freud, Gesammelte Werke (18 vols.), Lon- 
don, from 1940. C.P. = Freud, Collected Papers (5 vols.), London, 1924-50. 
Standard Ed. — Freud, Standard Edition (24 vols.), London, from 1953. En- 
tries marked with an asterisk have not been verified for the present edition. 
See Translator’s Introduction, p. xx. For non-technical authors, and for tech- 
nical authors where no specific work is mentioned, see the General Index.}. 

A 

AUTHOR INDEX AND LIST OF WORKS 
REFERRED TO IN THE TEXT 

[The figures in round brackets at the end of each entry indicate the 
page or pages of this volume on which the work in question is men- 
tioned. In the case of the Freud entries, the letters attached to the dates 
of publication are in accordance with the corresponding entries in the 
complete bibliography of Freud’s writings to be included in the last vol- 
ume of the Standard Edition .] 

Abel, K. (1884) Der Gegensinn der Urworte, Leipzig. (353, n. 3) 

Abraham, K. (1909) Traum und Mythus, Vienna. (386, n. 2, 437) 

Adler, A. (1910) ‘Der psychische Hermaphroditismus im Leben und in der 
Neurose’, Fortschr. Med., 28, 486. (432) 

(1911) ‘Beitrag zur Lehre vom Widerstand’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1,214. (618 n.) 


625 



626 


Bibliography 


Allison, A. (1868) ‘Nocturnal Insanity’ Med. Times & Gaz., 947,210. (121) 
Almoli, S. See Salomon Almoli. 

Amram, N. (1901) ‘Sepher pithron chalomoth, Jerusalem’ (38, n. 2) 
Aristotle De somniis and De divinatione per somnum. (36-7, 67, 130, n. 1, 
355 n„ 588-9) 

[Trans, by W. S. Hett (in volume ‘On the Soul’, Loeb Classical Library), 
London & New York, 1935.] 

Artemidorus of Daldis Oneirocritica. (37-8, 130, 131, n. 2, 389 n., 645, 
n. 2) 

[German trans.: Symbolik der Trdume by F. S. Krauss, Vienna, 1881, and 
‘Erotische Traume und ihre Symbolik’, Anthropophyteia, 9, 316, by 
Hans Licht. 

Engl, trans, (abridged): The Interpretation of Dreams, by R. Wood, Lon- 
don, 1644.] 

Artigues, R. (1884) Essai sur la valeur semeiologique du reve, (Thesis) Paris. 

( 68 ) 

Benini, V. (1898) ‘La memoria e la durata dei sogni’, Riv. ital. Filos., 13 a, 
149. (78, 103) 

Bernard-Leroy and Tobowolska, J. (1901) ‘Mecanisme intellectuel du 
reve’, Rev. phil., 51 , 570. (540-1) 

Bernfeld, S. (1944) ‘Freud’s Earliest Theories and the School of Helm- 
holtz’, Psychoanal. Quart., 13 , 341. (xvi n., 520 n.) 

Bernstein, I., and Segel, B. W. (1908) Judische Sprichwiirter und Redensar- 
ten, Warsaw. (165, n. 1) 

Betlheim, S., and Hartmann, H. (1924) ‘Uber Fehlreakdonen des Ge- 
dachtnisses bei Korsakoffschen Psychose’, Arch. Psychiat. Nervenkr., 72, 
278. (419) 

Bianchieri, F. (1912) ‘I sogni dei bambini di cinque anni’, Riv. Psicol., 8, 
325. (164 n.) 

See also Doglia and Bianchieri. 

Binz, C. (1878) Uber den Traum, Bonn. (53, 89, 109, 119) 

Bleuler, E. (1910) ‘Die Psychoanalyse Freuds’, /£. Psychoanal. psychopath. 
Forsch., 2, 623. (386, n. 2) 

Bonatelli, F. (1880) ‘Del sogno’, La filosofia delle scuole italiane, Feb. 16. (78) 
Borner, J. (1855) Das Alpdrucken, seine Begriindimg und Verhiitung, Wurz- 
burg. (68) 

Bottinger (1795) In C. P. J. Sprengel: Beitrdge zur Geschichte der Medizin, 
2 . (67 n.) 

Bouche-Leclercq, A. (1879-82) Histoire de la divination dans I’antiquite, 
Paris. (67 n.) 



Bibliography 


627 


Breuer, J., and Freud, S. (1895) see Freud, S. (1895 d) 

(1940 [1892]) see Freud, S. (1940;/) 

Buchsenschutz, B. (1868) Traum und Tmumdeutung im Altertum, Berlin. 
(36 n. 2, 130, n. 1, 165, n. 2) 

Burdach, K. F. (1838) Die Physiologie ah Erfahnmgswis-senschaft, Vol. 3 of 
2nd ed., 1832-40 (1st ed. 1826-32). (41, 83, 85, 110, 114,257) 
Busemann, A. (1909) ‘Traumleben der Schulkinder’, Z. pad. Psychol., 10 , 
294. (164 n.) 

(1910) ‘Psychologie der kindlichen Traumerlebnisse’, Z. pad. Psychol., 11 , 
320. (164 n.) 

Cabanis, E J. G. (1802) Rapports du physique et du moral de I’homme, Paris. (121) 
Calkins, M. W. (1893) ‘Statistics of Dreams’, Amer. J. Psychol., 5, 311. (53, 
55, 77, 254-5) 

Carena, Caesar (1641) Tractatus de Officio Sanctissimae Inquisitionis, Cre- 
mona. (102, n. 1) 

Chabaneix, P. (1897) Physiologie cerebrale: le subconscient chez les artistes, les 
savants, et les ecrivains, Paris. (77, «., 97) 

Cicero: De divinatione. (43, 88) 

[Trans, by W. A. Falconer (Loeb Classical Library), London & New 
York, 1922.] 

Claparede, E. (1905) ‘Esquisse d’une theorie biologique du sommeil’, Arch, 
psychol., 4 , 245. (85, n. 2) 

Clerk-Maxwell, J. (1876) Matter and Motion, London. (493, 558) 
Corlat, I. H. (1913) ‘Zwei sexual-symbolische Beispiele von Zahnarzt- 
Traumen’, Zbl. Psychoanal. Psychother., 3 , 440. (422, n. 1) 

Dattner, B. (1913) ‘Gold und Kot’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 495. (439) 
Davidson, Wolf (1799) Versuch tiber den Schlaf, Berlin. 2nd ed. (1st ed., 
1795). (94) 

Debacker, F. (1881) Des hallucinations et terreurs nocturnes chez les enfants, 
(Thesis) Paris. (168, n. 1, 625-6) 

Delacroix, H. (1904) ‘Sur la structure logique du reve’, Rev. Metaphys., 12 , 
921. (540) 

Delage, Y. (1891) ‘Essai sur la theorie du reve’, Rev. industr., 2, 40. (52, 
112-4, 212 n„ 630) 

Delbceuf, I. (1885) Le sommeil et les reves, Paris. (45-6, 54-5, 84, 90, 93, 
137-8, 212 «., 217, n. 1) 

Diepgen, P. (1912) Traum und Traumdeutung als mediz. naturwissenschaftl. 

Problem im Mittelatler, Berlin. (38, n. 2, 581 n.) 

Doglia, S. and Bianchieri, F. (1910-11) ‘I sogni dei bambini di tre anni’, 
Contrib. psicol., 1, 9. (164 n.) 



628 


Bibliography 


Dollinger, J. (1857) Heidenthum und Judenthum, Regensburg. (67 n.) 

Drexl, F. X. (1909) Achmets Traumbuch: Einleitung und Probe eines kritischen 
Textes, (Thesis) Munich. (38, n. 2) 

Dugas, L. (1897^) ‘Le sommeil et la cerebration inconsciente durant le som- 
meiF, Rev. phil., 43, 410. (88, 92) 

(1897£) ‘Le souvenir du reve’, Rev. phil, 44 , 220. (614) 

Du Prel, C. (1885) Die Philosophic der Mystik, Leipzig. (96, n. 2, 164 «., 
167 ».,314, n. 1,567 n„ 650 n.) 

Eder, M. D. (1913) ‘Augentraume’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1 , 157. (433 n .) 

Egger, V. (1895) ‘La duree apparente des reves’, Rev. phil., 40 , 41. (60, 97, 534) 
(1898) ‘Le souvenir dans le reve’, Rev. phil., 46 , 154. (79) 

Ellis, Havelock (1899) ‘The Stuff that Dreams are made of’. Popular 
Science Monthly, 54, 721. (53, 92, 630) 

(1911) The World of Dreams, London. (97, n. 2, 201, 215 n., 388, 408, 
438, 539, 581) 

Erdmann, J. E. (1852) Psychologische Briefe (Brief VI), Leipzig (103) 

Fechner, G. T. (1860) Elemente der Psychophysik, Leipzig. (81, 88, 574) 

Federn, P. (1914) ‘Uber zwei typische Traumsensationen’,//'. Psychoanal., 6 , 
89. (430) 

Fere, C. (1886) ‘Note sur un cas de paralysie hysterique consecutive a un 
reve’, Soc. biolog., 41 (Nov. 20). (120) 

(1887) ‘A Contribution to the Pathology of Dreams and of Hysterical Pa- 
ralysis’, Brain, 9 , 488. (120, n. 1) 

Ferenczi, S. (1910) ‘Die Psychoanalyse der Traume’, Psychiat.-neurol. Wschr., 
12 , Nos. 1 1-13. (131, n. 2, 165, n. 1, 278, n. 2, 361) 

[Trans.: ‘The Psychological Analysis of Dreams’, Chap. Ill of Contribu- 
tions to Psychoanalysis, Boston, 1916.] 

(1911) ‘Uber lenkbare Traume’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2, 31. (611) 

(1912) ‘Symbolische Darstellung des Lust-und Realitatsprinzips im Odipus- 
Mythos’, Imago, 1 , 276. (297, n. 1) 

[Trans.: ‘The Symbolic Representation of the Pleasure and Reality Prin- 
ciples in the Oedipus Myth’, Chap. X, Part I of Contributions to Psycho- 
Analysis, Boston, 1916.] 

(1913) ‘Zur Augensymbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1 , 161. (433 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘On Eye Symbolism’, Chap. X, Pt. II of Contributions to Psycho- 
Analysis, Boston, 1916.] 

(1916) ‘Affektvertauschung im Traume’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 4, 112. (510) 
[Trans.: 'Interchange of Affect in Dreams’, No. LV in Further Contribu- 
tions, London, 1926.] 

(1917) ‘Traume der Ahnungslosen’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 4, 208. (412) 



Bibliography 


629 


[Trans.: ‘Dreams of the Unsuspecting’, No. LVI of Further Contribu- 
tions, London, 1926.] 

Fichte, I. H. (1864) Psychologie: die Lehre vom bewussten Geiste des Menschen, 
(2 vols.), Leipzig. (41, 96, 103) 

Fischer, K. P. (1850) Grundziige des Systems der Anthropologie, Erlangen. (Pt. 

I, Vol. 2, in Grundziige des Systems der Philosophic.) (98) 

Fliess, W. (1906) Der Ablaufdes Lebens, Vienna. (126, 199, n. 2) 

Forster, M. (1910) ‘Das lateinisch-altenglische pseudo-Danielsche Traum- 
buch in Tiberius A. IIP, Archil > Stud, neueren Sprachen und Literaturen, 
125, 39. (38, n. 2) 

(1911) ‘Ein mittelenglisches Vers-Traumbuch des 13 Jahrhunderts’, Archiv 
Stud, neueren Sprachen und Literaturen, 127, 31. (38, n. 2) 

Foucault, M. (1906) Le reve: etudes et observations, Paris. (541, 551 n.) 
Freud, S. (187 7a) ‘Uber den Ursprung der hinteren Nerven-wurzeln im 
Riickerunark von Ammocoetes (Petromyzon Planeri)’, Sitzungsber. k. 
Akad. Wiss., Ill Abt, Bd. 75, January. (448-9) 

(1884?) ‘Uber Coca’, Centralbl. ges. Therap., 2, 289. (203) 

[Trans.: (abbreviated) ‘Coca’, Saint Louis Med. Surg.J., 47 (1884), 502.] 
(1893c) 'Quelques considerations pour une etude comparative des paralysies 
motrices organiques et hysteriques’, G.S., 1, 30; G.W., 1, 37. (601 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘Some Points for a Comparative Study of Organic and Hysteri- 
cal Motor Paralyses’, C.P., 1, 42; Standard Ed., 1.] 

(1894#) ‘Die Abwehr-Neuropsychosen’, G.S., 1 , 290; G.W., 1 , 57. (xvi, 
264 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘The Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’, C.P., 1 , 59; Standard 
Ed., 3.] 

(1895 b) ‘Uber die Berechtigung, von der Neurasthenic einen bestimmten 
Symptomenkomplex als “Angstneurose” abzutrennen’, G.S., 1 , 306; 
G.W, 1, 313. (190, 195) 

[Trans.: ‘On the Grounds for Detaching a Particular Syndrome from 
Neurasthenia under the Description “Anxiety Neurosis’”, C.P., 1, 76; 
Standard Ed., 3.] 

(1895 d) With Breuer, J., Studien uber Hysterie, Vienna. (G.S., 1, G. W, 1, 75. 
Omitting Breuer’s contributions.) (xiv-xvii, 112, n. 1, 132, 139, n. 1, 
176, n. 1, 212 n„ 520 n„ 560, 576, n. 2, 581 «., 585, 608, n. 3, 640 n.) 
[Trans.: Studies on Hysteria, Standard Ed., 2.] 

(189 6b) ‘Weitere Bemerkungen liber die Abwehr-Neuropsychosen’, G.S., 
1, 363; G.W, 1, 377. (176 n. 1, 264 n„ 584) 

[Trans.: ‘Further Remarks on the Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’, C.P., 1, 
155; Standard Ed., 3.] 



630 


Bibliography 


Freud, S. (cont.) 

(1898 b) ‘Zum psychischen Mechanismus der Vergesslichkeit’, G.W., 1 , 
517. (202, n. 1,557, n. 1,648 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘The Psychical Mechanism of Forgetting’, Standard Ed., 3.] 
(1899 a) ‘Uber Deckerinnerungen’, GJS., 1 , 465; G.W, 1 . (51 «., 205, n. 

2, 279 n„ 323, n. 2, 383, n. 9, 461, n. 1, 648 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘Screen Memories’, C.P., 5 , 47; Standard Ed., 3.] 

(1900#) Die Traumdeutung, Vienna. ( G.S. , 2-3; G.W, 2-3.) 

[Trans.: The Interpretation of Dreams, London, 1954; Standard Ed., 4 - 5 .] 
(297, n. 1,425,427, 432) 

( 1 90 1<*) Uber den Traum, Wiesbaden. ( G.S. , 3, 189; G.W, 2-3, 643.) (166 
n., 187, n. 1, 217, n. 1, 452 n„ 477 n.) 

[Trans.: 0?i Dreams, London, 1951; Standard Ed., 5, 629.] 

(1901 b) Zur Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens, Berlin. ( G.S. , 4 ; G.W, 4 .) 
(151, n. 1, 202 230, n. 1, 244, n. 2, 281 n., 290, n. 1, 330, n. 2, 435, 

n. 1, 493, n. 3, 539, n. 1, 553, n. 1, 557 «., 570, «. 2, 573 n„ 648 n.) 
[Trans.: The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, Standard Ed., 6.] 

(1904#) ‘Die Freud’sche psychoanalytische Methode’, G.S., 6 , 3; G.W, 5 , 

3. (133 n .) 

[Trans.: 'Freud’s Psycho-Analytic Method’, C.P., 1 , 264; Standard Ed. 7.] 
(1905c) Der Witz und seine Beziehnng znm Unbewussten, Vienna. ( G.S. , 9 ; 
G. W, 6.) (153 «., 227, n. 2, 301, n. 2, 332 n., 338, n. 1, 376, n. 1, 
391, n. 2, 481, n. 2, 518 644 «.) 

[Trans.: Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious, Standard Ed., 8.] 
(1905 d) Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, Vienna. ( G.S. , 5 , 3; G.W, 
5 , 29.) (xii, 163, n. 2, 278, ». 1, 306, n. 2, 390, n. 1, 432, 531 «., 645, 
n. 1) 

[Trans.: Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, London, 1949; Standard 
Ed., 7.] 

(1905c) ‘Bruchstiick einer Elysterie-Analyse’, G.S., 8 , 3; G.W, 5 , 163. (xiv, 
223, n. 1, 345 n., 376, n. 1, 389, 422, n. 2, 430, 532 «., 554 n., 557, n. 
2, 570, n. 1, 600, n. 1, 601, n. 2, 618 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’, C.P., 3, 13; Stan- 
dard Ed, 7.] 

(1907#) Der Wahn und die Trdume in W. Jensens ‘Gradiva’, Vienna. (G.S., 
9 , 273; G.W, 1, 31.) (129 «., 407 n.) 

[Trans.: Delusion and Dreams in Jensen’s ‘Gradiva’, Standard Ed., 9 .] 
(1908#) ‘Hysterische Phantasien und ihre Beziehung zur Bisexualitat’, G.S., 
5 , 246; G.W, 7, 191. (529, n. 3, 608) 

[Trans.: ‘Hysterical Phantasies and their Relation to Bisexuality’, C.P., 2, 
51 ; Standard Ed., 9 .] 



Bibliography 


631 


(1908£) ‘Charakter und Analerotik’, G.S., 5, 261; G.W, 7, 203. (250, n. 1, 
439) 

[Trans.: ‘Character and Anal Erotism’, C.P., 2, 45; Standard Ed., 9.] 
(1908c) ‘Uber infantile Sexualtheorien’, G.S., 5, 168; G. W, 7, 171. (283 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘On the Sexual Theories of Children’, C.P., 2, 59; Standard Ed., 9.] 
(1908c) ‘Der Dichter und das Phantasieren’, G.S., 10, 229; G.W., 7, 213. 
(529, n. 3) 

[Trans.: ‘Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming’, C.P., 4, 173; Standard 
Ed., 9.] 

(1909£) ‘Analyse der Phobie eines fiinfjahrigen Knaben’, G.S., 8, 129; 
G.W, 7, 243. (164 n„ 283 «., 284 n„ 286 n .) 

[Trans.: 'Analysis of a Phobia in a Five- Year-Old Boy’, C.P., 3, 149; 
Standard Ed., 10.] 

(1909 d) 'Bemerkungen uber einen Fall von Zwangsneurose’, G.S., 8, 269; 
G.W., 7, 381. (339 n., 376, n. 1, 481, n. 2) 

[Trans.: ‘Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’, C.P., 3, 293; Stan- 
dard Ed., 10.] 

(1910<2) Uber Psychoanalyse, Vienna. ( G.S . , 4, 349; G.W, 8, 3.) (647 n.) 

[Trans.: Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, Standard Ed., 11.] 

(1910 d) ‘Die zukiinftigen Chancen der psychoanalytischen Therapie’, 
G.S., 6, 25; G. W, 8, 104. (390, n. 2, 401, 405, 439, n. 2) 

[Trans.: ‘The Future Prospects of Psycho-Analytic Therapy’, C.P., 2, 
285; Standard Ed., 11.] 

(1910c) “‘Uber den Gegensinn der Urworte’”, G.S., 10, 221; G. W, 8, 214. 
(353, n. 3) 

[Trans.: “‘The Antithetical Sense of Primal Words’”, C.P., 4, 184; Stan- 
dard Ed., 11.] 

(1910/) ‘Brief an Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss Uber die Anthro-pophyteia’, G.S., 
11, 242; G.W, 8, 224. (645, n. 2) 

[Trans.: ‘Letter to Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss on Anthro-pophyteia’, Standard 
Ed., 11.] 

(1910 h) ‘Uber einen besonderen Typus der Objektwahl beim Manne’ (Bei- 
trage zur Psychologie des Liebeslebens’ I), G.S., 5, 186; G.W, 8, 66. 
(297, n. 1,439, n. 2) 

[Trans.: ‘A Special Type of Choice of Object made by Men’ (‘Contribu- 
tions to the Psychology of Love’ I), C.P., 4, 192; Standard Ed., 11.] 
(1910/) ‘Typisches Beispiel eines verkappten Odipustraumes’, Zentralbl. 
Psychoanal., 1, 45; reprinted in Die Traum-deutung, G.S., 3, 118, n.\ 
G. W, 2-3, 404 n. (178 n„ 433 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘A Typical Example of a Disguised Oedipus Dream’; included 
in The Interpretation of Dreams, Standard Ed., 5, 398 «.] 



632 


Bibliography 


Freud, S. (cont.) 

(191 la) ‘Nachtrage zur Traumdeutung’, Zentralbl. Psycho-anal, 1, 187. 
(Pardy reprinted G.S., 3 , 77 ff. and 126 £; G.W., 2 - 3 , 365 ff. and 412 
£) (395 n., 401, «. 1,443 n.) 

[Trans.: 'Additions to the Interpretation of Dreams’, (wholly incorpora- 
ted in The Interpretation of Dreams, Standard Ed., 5, 360 ff. and 408 £)] 
(1911 b) ‘Formulierungen iiber die zwei Prinzipien des psychischen 
Geschehens’, G.S., 5, 409; G.W., 8 , 230. (466 n., 606, n. 2 ) 

[Trans.: ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of Mental Functioning’, 
C.P., 4 , 13; Standard Ed., 12 .] 

(191 le) ‘Die Handhabung der Traumdeutung in der Psycho-analyse’, G.S., 
6 , 45; G.W., 8 , 350. (136 n„ 553, n. 1) 

[Trans.: ‘The Handling of Dream-Interpretation in Psycho-Analysis’, 
C.P., 2 , 305; Standard Ed., 12 .] 

(1912 g) ‘Einige Bernerkungen fiber den Begriff des Unbe-wussten in der 
Psychoanalyse’, G. W, 8 , 360. (653 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘Some Remarks on the Concept of the Unconscious as used in 
Psycho-Analysis’, C.P., 4 , 22; Standard Ed., 12 .] 

(1912-13) Totem und Tabu, Vienna. ( G.S. , 10 ; G.W., 9 .) (289, n. 1, 290 
n., 297, n. 1, 445 n., 539, n. 1) 

[Trans.: Totem and Taboo, London, 1950; Standard Ed., 13 .] 

(1913 a) ‘Ein Traum als Beweismittel’, G.S., 3 , 267; G. W, 10 , 12. (386, n. 
1, 528, n. 1, 601, n. 1) 

[Trans.: 'An Evidential Dream’, C.P., 2, 133; Standard Ed., 13 .] 

(1913 d) ‘Marchenstoffe in Traumen’, G.S., 3 , 259; G.W., 10 , 2. (Appen- 
dix B, 666) 

[Trans.: ‘The Occurrence in Dreams of Material from Fairy Tales’, C.P., 
4 , 236; Standard Ed., 13 .] 

(1913/) ‘Das Motiv der Kastchenwahl’, G.S., 10,243-56; G.W., 10, 24-37. 
[Trans.: ‘The Theme of the Three Caskets’, C.P., 4 , 244-56; Standard 
Ed, 12 .] 

(1913 h) ‘Erfahrungen und Beispiele aus der analytischen Praxis’, Int. Z. 
Psychoanai, 1 , 377. (Partly reprinted G.S., 11 , 301; G.W., 10 , 40. 
Partly included in Traumdeutung, G.S., 3 , 41, 71 £, 127 and 135; G.W., 
2 - 3 , 238, 359 ff , 413 f. and 433.) (265, n. 2, 444, n. 2, 467, n. 1) 
[Trans.: ‘Observations and Examples from Analytic Practice’, Standard 
Ed., 13 (in full). Also partly incorporated in The Interpretation of 
Dreams, Standard Ed., 4 , 232 and 5, 409 f. ] 

(191 3^) ‘Geleitwort zu Bourke’s Der Unrat in Sitte, Branch, Glauben und 
Gewohnheitsrecht der Vojker, G.S., 11 , 249; G.W., 10 , 453. (645, n. 2) 



Bibliography 


633 


[Trans.: ‘Preface to Bourke, Scatalogic Rites of All Nations' , C.P., 5 , 88; 
Standard Ed., 12 .] 

(1914*?) ‘Uber fausse reconnaissance (“deja raconte”) wahrend der 
psychoanalytischen Arbeit’, G.S., 6 , 76; G.W., 10 , 116. (435, n. 1) 
[Trans.: ‘Fausse reconnaissance (“deja raconte”) in Psycho-Analytic 
Treatment’, C.P., 2 , 334; Standard Ed., 14 .] 

(1914c) ‘Zur Einfiihrung des Narzissmus’, G.S., 6 , 155; G.W., 10 , 138 
(543, n. 2) 

[Trans.: ‘On Narcissism: an Introduction’, Cf, 4 , 30; Standard Ed., 14 .] 
(191 Ad) ‘Zur Geschichte der psychoanalytischen Bewegung’, G.S., 4 , 41 1; 
G. W, 10 , 44. (xii, xiv, 384, n. 3) 

[Trans.: ‘On the History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’, C.P., 1 , 
287; Standard Ed., 14 .] 

(1914c) ‘Darstellungen der “grossen Leistung” im Traume’, Int. Z. Psycho- 
anal., 2 , 384; reprinted in Die Tranmdeutung, G.S., 3 , 130; G.W., 2 - 3 , 
416. (448, n. 1) 

[Trans.: ‘The Representation in a Dream of a “Great Achievement’”; in- 
cluded in The Interpretation of Dreams, Standard Ed., 5, 412.] 

(191 5^) ‘Weitere Ratschlage zur Technik der Psychoanalyse III: Bemerkun- 
gen liber die Ubertragungsliebe’, G.S., 6 , 120; G. W, 10 , 306. (601, n. 2) 
[Trans.: ‘Observations on Transference-Love (Further Recommenda- 
tions on the Technique of Psycho-Analysis, III)’, C.P., 2 , 377; Standard 
Ed., 12 .] 

(1915£) ‘Zeitgemasses tiber Krieg und Tod’, G.S., 10 , 315-46; G.W., 10 , 
324-55. (289, n. 1) 

[Trans.: ‘Thoughts for the Times on War and Death’, C.P., 4 , 288-317; 
Standard Ed., 14 .] 

(1915<s0 ‘Die Verdrangung’, G.S., 5, 466; G.W., 10 , 248. (586, n. 2, 643 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘Repression’, C.P., 4 , 84; Standard Ed., 14 .] 

(1915c) ‘Das Unbewusste’, G.S., 5 , 480; G.W., 10 , 264. (640 n., 64 9 «., 
656 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘The Unconscious’, C.P., 4 , 98; Standard Ed., 14 .] 

(1916c) ‘Eine Beziehung zwischen einem Symbol und einem Symptom’, 
G.S., 5 , 310; G.W., 10 , 394. (397 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘A Connection between a Symbol and a Symptom’, C.P., 2 , 
162; Standard Ed., 14 .] 

(191 6d) ‘Einige Charaktertypen aus der psychoanalytischen Arbeit’, G.S., 
10 , 287; G.W., 10 , 364. (300 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘Some Character-Types Met with in Psycho-Analytic Work’, 
C.P., 4 , 318; Standard Ed., 14.] 



634 


Bibliography 


Freud, S. (cont.) 

(1916-17) Vorlesungen zur Einfuhrung in die Psychoanalyse, Vienna. ( G.S. , 
7; G.W., 11 .) (xxix, 51 n., 166 n., 176, n. 2, 188 n. 1, 265 n. 2, 311 
332 n., 395, 399, n. 1, 440 444, n. 1, 449, n. 1, 452 n„ 466, n. 1, 

556 n., 620 n.) 

[Trans.: Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis , revised ed. London, 
1929; Standard Ed., 15 and 16 .] 

(191 Id) ‘Metapsychologische Erganzung zur Traumlehre’, G.S., 5 , 520; 
G.W., 10 , 412. (67 n„ 563, n. 1, 580 n., 587, 593 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘A Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory of Dreams’, 
C.P., 4 , 137; Standard Ed., 14 .] 

(1918 b) ‘Aus der Geschichte einer infantilen Neurose’, G.S., 8, 439; G.W., 

12 , 29. (217, n. 2, 345 n., 407 «., 561, n. 1 ) 

[Trans.: ‘From the History of an Infantile Neurosis’, C.P., 3 , 473; Stan- 
dard Ed., 17 .] 

(191 9^) ‘Das Unheimliche’, G.S., 10 , 369; G.W, 12 , 229. (392 n., 449, n. 3) 
[Trans.: “‘The Uncanny’”, C.P., 4, 368; Standard Ed., 17 .] 

(1920/ ‘Uber die Psychogenese eines Falles von weiblicher Homosexuali- 
ty, G.S., 5 , 312; G.W, 12 , 271. (514, n. 2) 

[Transc. ‘The Psychogenesis of a Case of Female Homosexuality’, C.P., 
2 , 202; Standard Ed., 18 .] 

(1920/) ‘Erganzungen zur Traumlehre’ (Author’s Abstract of Congress Ad- 
dress), Int. Z. Psychoanal., 6 , 397. (Appendix B, 666) 

[Trans.: ‘Supplements to the Theory of Dreams’, Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 1 , 
354; Standard Ed., 18.] 

(1920 g) Jenseits des Lustprinzips, Vienna. ( G.S. , 6 , 191; G.W., 13 , 3.) (278, n. 
2, 301, n. 2, 498 n., 578 «., 597, n. 1, 604 n., 640 n.) 

[Trans.: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, London, 1950; Standard Ed., 18 .] 
(1921 b) Introduction [in English] to Varendonck, The Psychology of Day- 
Dreams, London. ( G.W. , 13 , 439; Standard Ed., 18 .) (529, n. 3) 

(1921c) Massenpsychologie und Ich-Analyse, Vienna. (G.S., 6, 261; G. W, 

13 , 73.) (184 n.,514, n. 1) 

[Trans.: Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, London, 1922; 
Standard Ed., 18 .] 

(1922/ ‘Traum und Telepathie’, G.S., 3 , 278; G.W., 13 , 165. (39 «., 195, 
n. 1, 366, n., 439, n. 2, 563, n. 1, 599, n. 2, 618, n.) 

[Trans.: ‘Dreams and Telepathy’, C.P., 4 , 408; Standard Ed., 18 .] 
(1922/ ‘Ober einige neurotische Mechanismen bei Eifer-sucht, Paranoia 
und Homosexuality’, G.S., 5 . 387; G.W., 13 , 195. (121 n) 

[Trans.: ‘Some Neurotic Mechanisms in Jealousy, Paranoia and Homo- 
sexuality’, C.P., 2 , 232; Standard Ed., 18 .] 



Bibliography 


635 


(1922 c) ‘Nachschrift zur Analyse des kleinen Hans’, G.S., 8 , 264; G.W., 
13, 431. (559, n. 3) 

[Trans.: ‘Postscript to the “Analysis of a Phobia in a Five- Year-Old- 
Boy’”, C.P., 3 , 288; Standard Ed., 10 .] 

(1923# [1922]) ‘“Psychoanalyse” und “Libido Theorie’”, G.S., 11 , 201; 
G.W., 13,211. (528, n. 1) 

[Trans.: Two Encyclopedia Articles’, C.P., 5 , 107; Standard Ed., 18 .] 
(\923b) Das Ich und das Es, Vienna. ( G.S . , 6 , 353; G.W., 13 , 237.) (194 
«., 514, n. 1, 580 «., 603 «., 653 n.) 

[Trans.: The Ego and the Id, London, 1927; Standard Ed., 19 .] 

(1923c) ‘Bemerkungen zur Theorie und Praxis der Traumdeutung’, G.S., 
3 , 305; G.W., 13 , 301. (136 n„ 197 n., 358, n. 3, 514, n. 1) 

[Trans.: ‘Remarks on the Theory and Practice of Dream-Interpretation’, 
C.P., 5 , 136; Standard Ed., 19 .] 

[1923d) ‘Eine Teufelsneurose im siebzehnten Jahrhundert’, G.S., 10 , 409; 
G.W, 13,317. (393, n. 3) 

[Trans.: ‘A Seventeenth Century Demonological Neurosis’, C.P, 4 , 436; 
Standard Ed., 19 .] 

(1923 f) 'Josef Popper-Lynkeus und die Theorie des Traumes’, G.S., 11 , 
295; G.W., 13 , 357. (126, n. 3, 343, n. 2) 

[Trans.: ‘Josef Popper-Lynkeus and the Theory of Dreams’, Standard 
Ed., 19 .] 

(1924-34) Gesammelte Schriften, Vienna, (xii, xxxi, 37, n. 1, 55, n. 1, 160, 
n. 1, 223, n. 2, 346 n., 546 n.) 

(1924c) ‘Das okonomische Problem des Masochismus’, G.S., 5 , 374; G.W, 
13, 371.(192, n. 3) 

[Trans.: ‘The Economic Problem of Masochism’, C.P, 2 , 255; Standard 
Ed., 19 .] 

(1925#) ‘Notiz iiber den Wunderblock’, G.S., 6 , 415; G. W, 14 , 3. (578 n.) 
[Trans.: 'A Note on the “Mystic Writing-Pad’”, C.P, 5 , 175; Standard 
Ed., 20 .] 

( 1 925c/) Selbstdarstellung’, G.S., 11 , 119; G.W, 14 , 33. (474 n.) 

[Trans.: An Autobiographical Study, London, 1935; Standard Ed., 20 .] 
(1925/) ‘Einige Nachtroge zum Ganzen der Traumdeutung’, G.S., 3 , 172; 
G.W., 1 , 559. (39 «., 106, n. 2, 563, n. 2, 659, n. 2) 

[Trans.: ‘Some Additional Notes upon Dream-Interpretation as a 
Whole’, C.P, 5 , 150; Standard Ed., 20 .] 

(1925y) ‘Einige psychische Folgen des anatomischen Geschlechtsunter- 
schieds’, G.S., 11 , 8; G.W., 14 , 19. (291 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Distinc- 
tion between the Sexes’, C.P, 5 , 186; Standard Ed., 19 .] 



636 


Bibliography 


Freud, S. (cont.) 

(192 6d) Hemmung, Symptom und Angst, Vienna. ( G.S. , 11 , 23; G.W., 13 , 
1 13.) (195, n. 2, 373, n. 1, 436, n. 2, 643 n.) 

[Trans.: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, London, 1936; The Problem 
of Anxiety, New York, 1936; Standard Ed., 20 .] 

(1927 c) Die Zukunft einer Illusion, Vienna. ( G.S. , 11,411; G.W., 14 , 325.) 
(492, n. 1) 

[Trans.: The Future of an Illusion, London, 1928; Standard Ed., 21 .] 
(1929B) ‘Brief an Maxime Leroy tiber einen Traum des Cartesius’, G.S., 
12 , 403; G.W., 14 , 558. (Appendix B, 666) 

[Trans.: ‘A Letter to Maxime Leroy on a Dream of Descartes’, Standard 
Ed., 21 .] 

(1930 a) Das Unbehagen in der Kultur, Vienna. ( G.S . , 12 , 29; G.W., 14 , 
421). (109 n.) 

[Trans.: Civilization and its Discontents, London, 1930; Standard Ed., 

21 .] 

(1930c) ‘Goethe-Preis 1930’, G.S., 12 , 406; G.W., 14 , 545. (175 n., 300 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘The Goethe Prize for 1930’, Standard Ed., 21 .] 

(1931 b) ‘Uber die weibliche Sexualitat’, G.S., 12 , 120; G.W., 14 , 517. 
(291 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘Female Sexuality’, C.P., 5 , 252; Standard Ed., 21 .] 

(1932c) ‘Meine Beriihrung mit Josef Popper-Lynkeus’, G.S., 12 , 415; 
G.W., 16 , 261. (xii, 126, n. 3, 343, n. 2) 

[Trans.: ‘My Contact with Josef Popper-Lynkeus’, C.P., 5 , 295; Standard 
Ed., 22 .] 

(1933 a) Neue Folge der Vorlesungenzur Einfiihrung in die Psychoanalyse, 
Vienna. (G.S., 12 , 151; G.W., 15 .) (39 «., 124 n„ 369 n., 528, n. 2, 543, 
n. 2, 569 n., 580 n., 597, n. 1, 643 n.) 

[Trans.: New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, London, 1933; 
Standard Ed., 22 .] 

(1940*z [1938 \) Abriss der Psychoanalyse, (G.W., 17 , 67.) (Appendix B, 666) 
[Trans.: An Outline of Psycho-Analysis, London and New York, 1949; 
Standard Ed., 23 .] 

(1940c [1922]) ‘Das Medusenhaupt’, G.W., 17 , 47. (392 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘Medusa’s Head’, C.P., 5 , 105; Standard Ed., 18 .] 

(1940 d [1892]) With Breuer, J., ‘Zur Theorie des hysterischen Anf alls’, 
G.W., 17 , 9. (xvii) 

[Trans.: ‘On the Theory of Hysterical Attacks’, C.P., 5 , 27; Standard 
Ed., 1 .] 

(1941a [1892]) ‘Brief an Josef Breuer’, G.W., 17 , 5. (604 n.) 

[Trans.: ‘A Letter to Josef Breuer’, C.P., 5 , 25; Standard Ed., 1 .] 



Bibliography 


637 


(1941c [1899]) ‘Eine erfiillte Traumahnung’, G.W., 17, 21. (39 n., 97, n. 
3, 661—4) 

[Trans.: 'A Premonitory Dream Fulfilled’, C.P., 5, 70; Standard Ed., 5, 
623. 

(1950a [1887-1902]) Aus denAnfangen der Psychoanalyse, London, (xii, xiv- 
xx, xxvi, 51 n., 126, n. 1, 145, n. 1, 149, n. 2, 150 n., 151, n. 1, 154 n., 
155 n., 158 n„ 163 «., 170 «., 175 n„ 178 n„ 184 n., 190, n. 2, 195, n. 
1, 205, n. 1, 226, n. 1, 226, n. 2, Til, n. 2, 228, n. 2, 233 n., 238, nn. 1 
and 2, 247 n., 265 n., 274 n„ 111, n. 1, 281 «., 297, rc. 1, 301, n. 2, 332 
n., 352 «., 353, «. 1, 422, n. 2, 461, n. 1, 472 n„ 475 «., 491, «. 2, 501 
n., 505 n„ 530 n„ 53 7 «., 547 «., 553, n. 2, 574 578 n„ 604 n., 632 

«., 640 «., 644 «., 647 «., 654 «., 659, n. 1, 661 , n. 1, 667) [In part in 
Standard Ed., 1.] 

Fuchs, E. (1909-12) Illustrierte Sittengeschichte (Erganzungs-bande), Mu- 
nich. (382 n.) 

Galton, F. (1907) Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development, 2nd ed., 
Everyman’s Edition, London (1st ed., 1883.) (172, 328, 532-3) 

Garneer, A. (1872) Traite des facultes de Pame, contenant Thistoire des princi- 
pals theories psychologiques, (3 vols.), Paris. (1st ed., 1852.) (60, 266-7) 

Giessler, C. M. (1888) Beitrage zur Phanomenologie des Traumlebens, 
Halle. (120, n. 1) 

(1890) Aus den Tiefen des Traumlebens, Halle. (120, n. 1) 

(1896) Die physiologischen Beziehungen der Traumvor-gdnge, Halle. (120, 
n. 1) 

Girou de Bouzareinges, C. and Girou de Bouzareinges, L. (1848) Physio- 
logic: essai sur le mecanisme des sensations, des idees et des sentiments, Paris. 
(58) 

Goblot, E. (1896) ‘Sur le souvenir des reves’, Rev. phil., 42, 288. (540, 614) 

Gomperz, T. (1866) Traumdeutung und Zauberei, Vienna. (130, n. 2) 

Gotthardt, O. (1912) Die Traumbcher des Mittelalters, Eisleben. (38, n. 2) 

Grcesinger, W. (1845) Pathologie und Therapie der psychischen Krankheiten, 
Stuttgart. (167) 

(1861) do., 2nd ed. (quoted by Radestock). (123, 264 n.) 

Gruppe, O. (1906) Griechische Mythologie und Religions-geschichte, Munich. 
(In Muller, Handbuch der klassischen Altertums-Wissenschaft, 5, 2.) 
(37-8) 

Guislain, J. (1833) Lemons orales sur les phrenopathies (3 vols.), Brussels. (121) 
[Quotation in text is from German trans.: Abhandlungen iiber die Phre- 
nopathien, Nuremberg, 1838.] 

Haffner, P. (1887) ‘Schlafen und Traumerf, Sammlung zeitgemasser Broschu- 
ren, 226, Frankfurt. (39, 84 n., 96, n. 1, 99-101) 



638 


Bibliography 


Hagen, F. W. (1846) ‘Psychologie und Psychiatric’, Wagner’s Handworterbuch 
der Physiologie, 2, 692, Brunswick. (122) 

Hallam, F. and Weed, S. (1896) ‘A Study of Dream Consciousness’, Amer. 
J. Psychol., 7, 405. (52, 168, 197) 

Hartmann, E. von (1890) Philosophic des Unbewussten, 10th ed., Leipzig. 
(1st ed., 1869.) (167, 567 n.) 

[Trans.: Philosophy of the Unconscious, by W. C. Coup-land, London, 
1884.] 

Hartmann, H., See Betlheim and Hartmann. 

Hennings, J. C. (1784) Von den Trdumen und Nachtwandlem, Weimar. (47, 58) 
Henzen, W. (1890) Uber die Traume in der altnordischen Sagaliteratur, (The- 
sis) Leipzig. (442-3) 

Herbert, J. F. (1892) Psychologie als Wissenschaft neu gegrundet aufErfahrung, 
Metaphysik und Math ematik. {Zweiter, analytischer Teil); Vol. 6 in Her- 
bart’s Sdmtliche Werke (ed. K. Kehrbach), Langensalza. (1st ed., Konigs- 
berg, 1825.) (108) 

Hermann, K. F. (1858) Lehrbuch der gottesdienstlichen Alterthiimer der Grie- 
chen, 2nd ed., Heidelberg. (Pt. II of Lehrbuch der griechischen Antiqui- 
tdten.) (67 n.) 

(1882) Lehrbuch der griechischen Privatalterthiimer, 3rd ed., Freiburg. (Pt. 
IV of Lehrbuch der griechischen Antiquitdten) . (67 n.) 

Herodotus History. (433 n.) 

[Trans, by A. D. Godley, Vol. Ill (Loeb Classical Library), London and 
New York, 1922.] 

Herveyde Saint-Denys, Marquis d’, (1867) Les reves etles moyens de les di- 
riger, Paris. (Published anonymously.) (47, 59, 93-4, 611) 
Hildebrandt, F. W. (1875) Der Traum und seine Verwer-thung fir’s Leben, 
Leipzig. (43-4, 49, 52-4, 59-61, 88, 95-7, 99-104) 

Hippocrates Ancient Medicine and Regimen. (37, n. 3, 67 «., 438) 

[Trans, by W. H. S. Jones, Vols. I and IV (Loeb Classical Library), Lon- 
don and New York, 1923 and 1931.] 

Hitschmann, E. (1913) ‘Goethe als Vatersymbol’, Lnt. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 
569. (389) Hobbes, T. (1651) Leviathan, London. (581 n.) 
Hoffbauer, J. C. (1796) Naturlehre der Seele, Halle. (58) 

Hohnbaum (1830) In C. L. Nasse: Jb. Anthrop., 1 (120) 

Hug-Hellmuth, H. von (1911) ‘Analyse eines Traumes eines 5Vi jahrigen 
Knaben’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2 , 122. (164 n.) 

(1913) ‘Kindertraume’, Lnt. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 470. (164 n.) 

(1915) ‘Ein Traum der sich selbst deutet’, lnt. Z. Psycho-anal., 3 , 33. (176, 
n. 2) 



Bibliography 


639 


*Ideler, K. W. (1862) ‘Die Enstehung des Wahnsinns aus den Traumen’, 
Charite Annalen, 3, Berlin. (120, n. 1) 

*Iwaya, S. (1902) Traumdeutung in Japan’, Ostasien, 302. (38, n. 2) 

Jekels, L. (1917) ‘Shakespeare’s Macbeth’, Imago, S, 170. (300 n.) 

Jessen, P. (1855) Versuch einer wissenschaftlichen Begriindung der Psychologie, 
Berlin. (42, 47, 57, 79, 98, 104) 

Jodl, E (1896) Lehrbuch der Psychologie, Stuttgart. (89) 

Jones, E. (191 0a) ‘The Oedipus Complex as an Explanation of Hamlet’s 
Mystery’, Amer. J. Psychol., 21 , 72. (300 n.) 

(1910 b) ‘Freud’s Theory of Dreams’, Amer. J. PsychoL, 21 , 283. (436-7) 
(1911) 'The Relationship between Dreams and Psycho-neurotic Symp- 
toms’, Am. J. Insanity, 68, 57. (608, n. 2) 

(1912,2) ‘Unbewusste Zahlenbehandlung’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2, 241. (453, 
n. 2) 

(1912 b) ‘A Forgotten Dream’,/. Abnorm. PsychoL, 7, 5. (559, n. 2) 

(191 4a) ‘Frau und Zimmer’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 2 , 380. (389 n .) 

(1914 b) ‘Zahnziehen und Geburf , Int. Z. Psychoanal., 2, 380. (423, n. 1) 
(1916) The Theory of Symbolism’, Brit. J. PsychoL, 9, 181. (386, n. 2) 
(1949) Hamlet and Oedipus, London. (300 n.) 

(1953) Sigmund Freud: Life and Work, 1, London, (xxii, 144, n. 1, 203 
667) 

Josephus, Flavius Antiquitates Judaicae. (369) 

[Trans.: Ancient History of the Jews by W. Whiston, London, 1874.] 
Jung, C. G. (ed.) (1906) Diagnostische Assoziationsstudien (2 vols.), Leipzig. 
(570, n. 2) 

[Trans.: Studies in Word-Association, London.] 

(1907) Uber die Psychologie der Dementia prtecox, Halle. (568 n.) 

[Trans.: The Psychology of Dementia Prtecox, New York, 1909.] 

(191 0^z) ‘Uber Konflikte der kindlichen Seel e’,/6. psycho-anal, psychopath. 
Forsch., 2, 33. (164 n.) 

(19106) ‘Ein Beitrag zur Psychologie des Geriichtes’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1, 
81. (370) 

(1911) ‘Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis des Zahlentraumes’, Zbl. PsychoanaL, 1, 
567. (453, n. 2) 

Kant, I. (1764) Versuch iiber die Krankheiten des Kopjes. (121-2) 

(1798) Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsichi. (103-4) 

Karpinska, L. von (1914) ‘Ein Beitrag zur Analyse “sinnloser” Worte in 
Traume’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 2, 164. (339) 

Kazowsky, A. D. (1901) ‘Zur Frage nach dem Zusammenhange von Trau- 
men und Wahnvorstellungen’, Neurol. Zbl., 440 and 508. (120, n. 1) 



640 


Bibliography 


Kerchgraber, F. (1912) ‘Der Hut als Symbol des Genitales’, Zbl. Psycho anal. 
Psychother., 3 , 95. (397 n.) 

Kleinpaul, R. (1898) Die Lebendigen und die Toten in Volksglauben, Religion 
and Sage, Leipzig. (386, n. 2) 

Krauss, A. (1858-59) ‘Der Sinn im Wahnsinn’, Allg. Z. Psychol., 15 , 617 
and 16 , 222. (70-1, 120-2, 123) 

Krauss, F. S. See Artemidorus. (391, n. 1) 

Ladd, G. T. (1892) ‘Contribution to the Psychology of Visual Dreams’, 
Mind, (New Series) 1, 299. (66-7, 628) 

Landauer, K. (1918) ‘Handlungen des Schlafenden’, Z. ges. Near. Psychiat., 
39, 329. (258 n.) 

*Lasegue, C. (1881) ‘Le delire alcoolique n’est pas un delire, mais un reve’, 
Arch. gen. Med. (120, n. 1) 

Lauer, C. (1913) ‘Das Wesen des Traumes in der Beurteilung der talmudi- 
schen und rabbinischen Literatur’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1 , 459. (38, 
n. 2) 

Lehmann, A. (1908) Aberglaube und Zauberei von den dltesten Zeiten bis in 
die Gegenwart (German trans, by Petersen), Stuttgart. (67 n.) 

Le Lorrain, J. (1894) ‘La duree du temps dans les reves’, Rev. phil., 38 , 275. 

(60, 97, 534) (1895) ‘Le reve’, Rev. phil, 40 , 59. (534, 606, n. 1) 

Lelut. (1852) ‘Memoire sur les sommeil, les songes et le sonnambulisme’, 
Ann. med.-psychol., 4, 331. (121) 

Lemoine, A. (1855) Du sommeil au point de vue physiologique et psychologique, 
Paris. (87) 

Leroy. See Bernard-Leroy. 

Leuret, F. (1834) Fragments psychologiques sur la folie, Paris. (568) 
Liebeault, A. A. (1889) Le sommeil provoque et les etats analogues, Paris. 
(609 n.) 

Lipps, T. (1883) Grundtatsachen des Seelenlebens, Bonn. (257) 

(1897) ‘Der Begriff des Unbewussten in der Psychologie’, Records of the 
Third Internat. Congr. Psychol., Munich. (650-51, 652) 

*Lloyd, W. (1877) Magnetism and Mesmerism in Antiquity, London (67 n.) 
Lowinger (1908) ‘Der Traum in der jiidischen Literatur’, Mitt.jud. Volksk., 
10 . (38, n. 2) 

Lucretius De rerum natura. (42) 

[Trans, by W. H. D. Rouse (Loeb Classical Library), London and New 
York, 1924.] 

‘Lynkeus’ (J. Popper) (1899) Phantasien eines Realisten, Dresden. (126, 343, 
n. 2) 

Maass, J. G. E. (1805) Versuch iiber die Leidenschafien, Halle. (42) 



Bibliography 


641 


Macario, M. M. A. (1847) ‘Des reves, consideres sous le rapport physio- 
logique et pathologique’, Pt. II, Ann. medpsychol., 9, 27. (121) 

(1857) Du sommeil, des reves et du sonnambulisme dans I’etat de sante et de 
maladie , Paris-Lyons. (536) 

Macntsh, R. (1830) Philosophy of Sleep, Glasgow. (58) 

[German trans.: Der Schlafin alien seinen Gestalten, Leipzig, 1835.] 

Maeder, A. (1908) ‘Die Symbolik in den Legenden, Marchen, Gebrauchen, 
und Traumen’, Psychiat.-neurol. Wschr., 10 , 55. (386, n. 2) 

(1912) ‘Uber die Funktion des Traumes \ Jb. psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch., 
4 , 692. (618 n.) 

Maine de Biran, M. F. P. (1834) Nouvelles considerations sur les rapports du 
physique et du moral de I’homme, (ed. by V. Cousin), Paris. (121) 

Marcinowski, J. (1911) ‘Eine kleine Mitteilung’, Zbl. Psycho-anal, 1 , 575. 
(337-8) 

(1912,2) ‘Gezeichnete Traume’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2, 490 (391) 

(1912 b) ‘Drei Romane in Zahlen’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2, 619. (453, n. 2) 

Maudsley, H. (1868) Psychology and Pathology of the Mind, London, (lsted., 
1867.) (650 n.) 

Maury, L. F. A. (1853) ‘Nouvelles observations sur les analogies des pheno- 
menes du reve et de l’alienation mentale’, Pt. II, Ann. med-psychol, 5, 
404. (61, 121, 533-5) 

(1878) Le sommeil et les reves, Paris. (1st ed., 1861.) (42, 46, 50, 58-61, 
65-6, 68-9, 87-9, 91-4, 97, 104-6, 109, 120, 121, 124, 222, 562 «., 
570, n. 1,614) 

*Meier, G. F. (1758) Versuch einer Erkdiimngdes Nachtwandelns, Halle. (57-8) 

Meynert, T. (1892) Sammlung von populdrwissenschaftlichen Vortragen uber 
den Bau und die Leistungen des Gehirns, Vienna. (256, 284) 

Miura, K. (1906) ‘Uber japanische Traumdeutere’, Mitt, dtsch. Ges. Naturk. 
Ostasiens, 10 , 291. (38, n. 2) 

Moreau, J. (1855) ‘De l’identite de l’etat de reve et de folie’, Ann. med.- 
psychol., 1 , 361. (121) 

Muller, J. (1826) Vber die phantastischen Gesichtserscheinungen, Coblenz. 
(65-6) 

Myers, F. W. H. (1892) ‘Hypermnesic Dreams’, Proc. Soc. Psych. Res., 8 , 362. 
(47) 

Nacke, P. (1903) ‘Uber sexuelle Traume’, Arch. Kriminalanthropol, 307. (431) 
(1905) ‘Der Traum als feinstes Reagens £ d. Art d. sexuellen Empfindens’, 
Monatschr. f. Krim.-Psychol., 2, 500. (431) 

(1907) ‘Kontrasttraume und spez. sexuelle Kontrasttraume’, Arch. Krimi- 
nalanthropol., 24 , 1 . (431) 



642 


Bibliography 


Nacke, P. (cont.) 

(1908) ‘Beitrage zu den sexuellen Traumen’, Arch. Kriminalanthropol., 29, 
363. (431) 

(1911) ‘Die diagnostische und prognosdsche Brauchbarkeit der sex. 
Traume’, Arztl. Sachv.-Ztg, 2. (431) 

Negelein, J. von (1912) ‘Der Traumschliissel des Jaggadeva’, Relig. Gesch. 
Vers., 11, 4. (38, n. 2) 

Nelson, J. (1888) ‘A Study of Dreams’, Amer. J. Psychol., 1, 367. (51) 
Nordenskjold, O. et al (1904) Antarctic. Zwei Jahre in Schnee und Eis am 
Siidpol, (2 vols.), Berlin. (164 n.) 

[English trans, (abr.) -.Antarctica, London, 1905.] 

Pachantoni, D. (1909) ‘Der Traum als Urschprung von Wahnideen bei Al- 
koholdelirianten’, Zbl. Nervenheilk., 32, 796. (120, n. 1) 

Paulhan, F. (1894) ‘A propos de l’activite de l’esprit dans le reve’; under 
‘Correspondence’ in Rev. phil, 38, 546. (540) 

Peisse, L. (1857) La medecine etles medecins, Paris. (124) 

Pfaff, E. R. (1868) Das Traumleben und seine Deutung nach den Prinzipien 
der Arab er, Perser, Griechen, Inder und Agypter, Leipzig. (99) 

Pfister, O. (1909) ‘Ein Fall von psychoanalytischer Seelsorge und Seelenhei- 
lung’, Evangelische Freiheit, Tubingen. (439, n. 2) 

(1911-12) ‘Die psychologische Entratselung der religiosen Glossolalie und 
der automatischen Kryptographie’,/^. psychoanal, psychopath. Forsch., 3, 
427 and 730. (392) 

(1913) ‘Kryptolalie, Kryptographie und unbewusstes Vexierbild bei Nor- 
malen’ , Jb. psychoanal, und psychopath. Eorsch., 5, 115. (392) 

Pichon, A. E. (1896) Contribution a I’etude des delires oniriques ou delires de 
reve, Bordeaux. (120, n. 1) 

Pilcz, A. (1899) ‘Uber eine gewisse Gesetzmassigkeit in den Traumen’, Au- 
thor’s Abstract, Mschr. Psychiat. Netirol., 5, 231, Berlin. (54) 

Plato Republic. (99, 658) 

[Trans, by B. Jowett (Dialogues, Vol. II), Oxford, 1871.] 

Pohorilles, N. E. (1913) ‘Eduard von Hartmanns Gesetz der von unbewuss- 
ten Zielvorstellungen geleiteten Assoziationen’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 
605. (567 n.) 

Potzl, O. (1917) ‘Experimentell erregte Traumbilder in ihren Beziehungen 
zum indirekten Sehen’, Z, ges. Neurol. Psychiat., 37, 278. (214, n. 2) 
Prince, Morton (1910) ‘The Mechanism and Interpretation of Dreams’,/. 
abnorm. Psychol., 5, 139. (559) 

Purkinje, J. E. (1846) ‘Wachen, Schlaf, Traum und verwandte Zustande’, R. 
Wagner’s FLandwiirterbuch der Physiologie, 3, 412, Brunswick. (115, 167) 



Bibliography 


643 


Putnam, J. J. (1912) ‘Ein charakteristischer Kindertraum’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 
2 , 328. (164 n.) 

*Raalte, F. van (1912) ‘Kinderdroomen’, Het Kind, Jan. (164 n .) 
Radestock, P. (1879) Schlafund Traam, Leipzig. (42, 68, 77-8, 88-9, 98, 
103, 120-3, 167) 

Rank, 0.(1 909) Der Mythus von der Geburt des Helden, Leipzig and Vienna. 
(290 n„ 436, n. 1.) 

[ Trans. : Myth of the Birth of the Hero, New York, 1913] 

(1910) ‘Ein Traum der sich selbst deutet’, Jb. Psychoanal. psychopath. 

Forsch., 2 , 465. (194 n„ 271, n. 2, 345 n., 370, 384, n. 3, 433 n., 441) 
(191 la) ‘Beispiel eines verkappten Odipustraumes’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1, 
167. (433 n.) 

(1911 b) ‘Belege zur Rettungsphantasie’, Zbl Psychoanal., 1, 331. (439, n. 2) 
(1911c) ‘Zum Thema der Zahnreiztraume’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1, 408. (423 — 
27) 

(1912 a) ‘Die Symbolschichtung im Wecktraum und ihre Wiederkehr im 
mythischen Denken’ , Jb. psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch., 4 , 51. (253 n., 
271, n. 2, 387, n. 2, 402, 437-39) 

(1912 b) ‘Aktuelle Sexualregungen als Traumanlasse’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2 , 
596. (271, n. 2) 

(1912c) Das Inzest-Motiv in Dichtung und Sage, Leipzig and Vienna. (290 n.) 
(1913) ‘Eine noch nicht beschriebene Form des Odipus-Traumes’, Int. Z. 
Psychoanal., 1, 151. (433 n.) 

(1914) ‘Die “Geburts-Rettungsphantasie” in Traum und Dichtung’, Int. Z. 
Psychoanal., 2 , 43. (439, n. 2) 

Rank, O., and Sachs, H. (1913) Die Bedeutung der Psychoanalyse fur die Geis- 
teswissenschaften, Wiesbaden. (386, n. 2) 

[Trans.: The Significance of Psychoanalysis for the Mental Sciences, New 
York, 1915.] 

Regis, E. (1894) ‘Les hallucinations oniriques ou du sommeil des degeneres mys- 
tiques’, Compte rendu Congres Med. Alien., 260, Paris, 1895. (120, n. 1) 
Reik, T. (1911) ‘Zur Rettungssymbolik’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1, 499. (439, n. 2) 
(1915) ‘Gold und Kot’, Int. Z. Psychoanal, 3 ., 183. (439) 

Reitler, R. (1913 a) ‘Zur Augensymbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 159. (433 n.) 
(1913 b) ‘Zur Genital-und Sekret-Symbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal, 1, 492. 
(394) 

Robert, W. (1886) Der Traum als Naturnotwendigkeit erkliirt, Hamburg. (51, 
110-3, 197, 210-1, 221, 618, 630) 

Robitsek, A. (1912) ‘Zur Frage der Symbolik in dem Traumen Gesunder’, 
Zbl. Psychoanal., 2., 340. (408-11) 



644 


Bibliography 


Roffenstein, G. (1923) ‘Experimentelle Symboltraume’, Z. ges. Neurol. Psy- 
chiat., 87, 362. (419) 

R[orschach], H. (1912) ‘Zur Symbolik der Schlange und der Kravatte’, Zbl. 
Psychoanal., 2 , 675. (391, n. 1) 

Sachs, H. (1911) ‘Zur Darstellungs-Technik des Traumes’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 
1,413. (445-46) 

(1912) ‘Traumdeutung und Menschenkenntnis’,/^. Psychoanal, psychopath. 
Forsch., 3, 568. (659) 

(1913) ‘Ein Traum Bismarcks’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 80. (413-16) 

(1914) ‘Das Zimmer als Traumdarstellung des Weibes’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 
2 , 35. (390) See also Rank and Sachs. 

Salomon, Almoli Ben Jacob (1637) Pithron Chalomoth, Amsterdam. (38, n. 2) 
Sanctis, Sante de (1896) I sogni e il sonno nell’ islerismo e nella epilepsia, 
Rome. (120) 

(1897tf) ‘Les maladies mentales et les reves’, extrait des Ann. Soc. Med. de 
Gand, 76 , 177. (120) 

*(189 7b) ‘Sui rapporti d’identita, di somiglianza, di analogia e di equiva- 
lenza fra sogno e pazzia’, Riv. quindicinale Psicol. Psichiat. Neuropatol., 
Nov. 15. (120) 

(1898 a) ‘Psychoses et reves’, Rapport an Congres de neurol. et d’hypnologie 
de Bruxelles 1897; Comptes rendus, 1, 137. (120) 

(1898 b) ‘I sogni dei neuropatici e dei pazzi’, Arch, psichiat. antrop. crim., 
19 , 342. (120) (1899) I sogni, Turin. (121, 125) 

[ German transi, by O. Schmidt, Halle, 1901.] 

Scherner, K. A. (1861) Das Leben des Traumes, Berlin. (70-1, 115-19, 165 
n., 258-61, 370, 381, 388, 394 «., 438, 585, 630, 651) 
Schleiermacher, F. (1862) Psychologie, (Vol. 6, Sec. 3 in CollectedWorks, ed. 

L. George), Berlin. (82, 103, 134) 

Scholz, F. (1887) Schlafund Traum, Leipzig. (54, 90, 99, 168) 

[Trans.: Sleep and Dreams by H. M. Jewett, New York, 1893.] 
Schopenhauer, A. (1862) ‘Versuch iiber das Geistersehen und was damit 
zusammenhangt’, Parerga und Paralipomena (Essay V), 1, 213, 2nd ed., 
Berlin. (1st ed. 1851.) (70, 98, 122) 

Schrotter, K. (1912) ‘Experimentelle Traume’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2 , 638. (419) 
Schubert, G. H. von (1814) Die Symbolik des Traumes, Bamberg. (96, 387) 
Schwarz, F. (1913) ‘Traum und Traumdeutung nach “Abdalgan an-Nabulusi’”, 
Z. deutsch. morgenl. Ges., 67 , 473. (38, n. 2) 

Secker, F. (1909-10) ‘Chinesische Ansichten iiber den Traum’, Neue metaph. 
Rndschr., 17 , 101. (38, n. 2) 

Siebeck, H. (1877) ‘Das Traumleben der Seele’, Sammlung gemeinverstand- 
licher Vortrage, Berlin. (90) 



Bibliography 


645 


Silberer, H. (1909) ‘Bericht tiber eine Methode, gewisse symbolische Hal- 
luzinations-Erscheinungen hervorzurufen und zu beobachten’, Jb. 
psychoanal, psychopath. Forsch., 1, 513. (82, n. 1, 134, n. 2, 379-80, 
413, 448 541-3) 

(1910) ‘Phantasie und Mythos’ , Jb. psychoanal, psychopath. Forsch., 2, 541. 
(134, n. 2,248, n. 3) 

(1912) ‘Symbolik des Erwachens und Schwellensymbolik Uberhaupt’, Jb. 

psychoanal, psychopath. Forsch., 3, 621. (134, n. 2,541-3, 598) 

(1914) Probleme der Mystik und Hirer Symbolik, Vienna and Leipzig. (562) 
Simon, P. M. (1888) Le monde des reves, Paris. (63, 67-8, 72, 167) 

*Sperber, H. (1912) ‘Uber den Einfluss sexueller Momente auf Entstehung 
und Entwicklung der Sprache’, Imago, 1, 405. (387 n.) 

Spielrein, S. (1913) ‘Traum von “Pater Freudenreich’”, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 
1,484. (164 n.) 

Spitta, K. (1882) Die Schlaf-und Traumzustiinde der mensch-lichen Seele, Tu- 
bingen. (1st ed„ 1878.) (68, 80, 83, 88, 89-92, 96, n. 1, 98-9, 102, 
104, 120, 122, 255, 551) 

Spitteler, C. (1914) Meine friihesten Erlebnisse, Jena. (194 n., 285, n. 2) 
Stannius, H. (1849) Das peripherische Nervensystem der Fische, anatomisch 
und physiologisch untersucht, Rostock. (448, 489, n. 1) 

Starcke, A. (1911) ‘Ein Traum der das Gegenteil einer Wunscherfullung zu 
verwirklichen schien’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2 , 86. (192) 

Starcke, J. (1913) ‘Neue Traumexperimente in Zusammenhang mit alteren 
und neueren Traumtheorien’,/6. psychoanal, psychopath. Forsch., 5, 233. 
(94, 165, n. 2) 

Stekel, W. (1909) ‘Beitrage zur Traumdeutung’, Jb. psycho-anal, psychopath. 
Forsch., 1, 458. (310, 373, 384, n. 3, 392-4, 397 n„ 398 n„ 415) 
(1911) Die Sprache des Traumes, Wiesbaden. (385, 392-4, 420, n. 1, 432, 446) 
Stricker, S. (1879) Studien fiber das Bewusstsein, Vienna. (90, 106, 497) 
Strumpell, A. von (1883-84) Lehrbuch der speciellen Pathologie und Thera- 
pie der inneren Krankheiten, Leipzig. (56) 

[Trans.: Text-book of Medicine, (2 vols.), 4th Amer. Ed., New York, 1912.] 
Strumpell, L. (1877) Die Natur und Enstehung der Trdume, Leipzig. (41, 49, 
52, 54-5, 62-3, 67, 71-2, 76-9, 83, 86-7, 89-91, 110, 215, 255-6, 
260, 268, 497) 

Stumpf, E. J. G. (1899) Der Traum und seine Deutung, Leipzig. (132, n. 1) 
Sully, J. (1893) ‘The Dream as a Revelation’, Fortnightly Rev., 53, 354. (93, 
168, n. 2, 540, 630) 

Swoboda, H. (1904) Die Perioden des Menschlichen Organis-mus, Vienna. 
(126, 199,419) 

Tannery, M. E (1898) ‘Sur la memoire dans le reve’, Rev. phil., 45, 637. (551 n.) 



646 


Bibliography 


Tausk, V. (1913) ‘Zur Psychologie der Kindersexualitaf, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 
1, 444. (164 n„ 339] 

(1914) ‘Kleider und Farben im Dienste der Traumdarstel-lung’, Int. Z. Psy- 
choanal., 2, 464. (446) 

Tfinkdji, J. (1913) ‘Essai sur les songes et Fart de les interpreter (onirocritie) 
en Mesopotomie’, Anthropos, 8, 505. (38, n. 2, 139, n. 2) 

Thomayer, S. and Simerka (1897) ‘Sur la signification de quelques reves’, 
Rev. neurol., 5, 98. (121) 

Tissie, P. (1898) Les reves, physiologie et pathologie, Paris. (1st ed., 1870.) (68, 
69-70,7-5, 78, 120-1, 167) 

Tobowolska, J. (1900) Etude sur les illusions de temps dans les reves du sommeil 
normal, (Thesis) Paris. (97, n. 1, 536, 540-1) 

See also Bernard-Leroy and Tobowolska. 

Varendonck, J. (1912) The Psychology of Day-Dreams, London. (529, n. 3) 

Vaschide, N. (1911) Le sommeil et les reves, Paris. (45 «., 47, 94, 61 1) 

Vespa, B. (1897) ‘II sonno e i sogni nei neuro-e psicopatici’, Boll. Soc. Lanci- 
siana Osp., 17, 193. (120, n. 1) 

Vold, J. Mourly (1896) ‘Experiences sur les reves et en particulier sur ceux 
d’origine musculaire et optique’ (review), Rev. phil., 42, 542. (72) 
(1910-12) Vher den Traum (2 vols.) ( German transl, by O. Klemm), Leip- 
zig. (73 n„ 256, n. 2, 430) 

Volkelt, J. (1875) Die traum-Phantasie, Stuttgart. (50, 70, 74, 88, 91-2, 98, 
103, 115-18, 168,258-60,381) 

Weed, S. See Hallam and Weed. 

Weygandt, W. (1893) Entstehung der Traurne, Leipzig. (42, 59, 69, 75, 91, 
157 n.) 

Whiton Calkins. See Calkins, Whiton. 

Wiggam, A. (1909) ‘A Contribution to the Data of Dream Psychology’, Ped. 
Sem. J. Genet. Psychol., 16, 250. (164 n.) 

Winterstein, A. von (1912) ‘Zwei Belege fur die Wunscher-fiillung im 
Traurne’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2, 292. (42) 

Wittels, F. (1924) Sigmund Freud: der Mann, die Lehre, die Schule, Vienna. 
(247, n. 3, 458 n.) 

[Trans.: Sigmund Freud: his Personality, his Teaching and his School, by 
Eden and Cedar Paul, London, 1924.] 

(1931) Freud and his Time (trans, by Louise Brink), New York. (477 n.) 

Wundt, W. (1874) Grundzuge der physiologischen Psychologie, Leipzig. (62, 
64, 74-5, 90-1, 122, 256-7, 268) 

Zeller, A. (1818) ‘Irre’, Ersch and Gruber: Allgemeine Encyclopedic der Wis- 
senschaften, 24, 120. (102)} 



Bibliography 


647 


B 

LIST OF OTHER WORKS ON DREAMS 
PUBLISHED BEFORE THE YEAR 1900 

[ These are works included in Freud’s Bibliographies but not referred to in 

the text.] 

Ahmad Ibn Sirin, Achmetis f. Seirim Oneirocriticae, ed. N. Rigaltius, Paris, 
1603. 

* Alberti, Michael (1744) Diss. de insomniorum influxi in sanitatem etmor- 
bos. Resp. Titius Halae M 

Alix (1883) ‘Les reves’, Rev. Sci. Industr. 3rd series, 6, 554. 

*Anon (1890) ‘Reves et l’hypnotisme’, Le Monde, Aug. 25. 

*(1890) ‘Science of Dreams’, The Lyceum, p. 28, Dublin. 

(1893) ‘The Utility of Dreams’, J. Comp. Neurol, 3, 17, Granville. 

Bacci, Domenico (1857) Sui sogni e sid sonnambidismo, pensiero fisiologico- 
metafisici, Venice. 

Ball, B. (1885) La morphinomanie, les reves prolonges, Paris. 

Benezi;, Emil (1897) ‘Das Traummotiv in der mittelhoch-deutschen Dich- 
tung bis 1250 und in alten deutschen Volksliedern’, Beneze: Sageng. 
und lit.-hist. Unters, 1, Das Traummotiv, Halle. 

*Benini, V. (1898) ‘Nel moneto dei sogni’, II Pensiero nuovo, Apr. 

*Birkmaier, Hieron (1715) Licht im Finsterniss der ndcht-lichen Gesichte und 
Trdume, Nuremberg. 

Bisland, E. (1896) ‘Dreams and their Mysteries’, N. Am. Rev. 162, 716. 

Bradley, F. H. (1894) ‘On the Failure of Movement in Dream’, Mind, (new 
series), 3, 373, London. 

Brander, R. (1884) Der Schlaf und das Traumleben, Leipzig. 

Bremer, L. (1893) ‘Traum und Krankheit’, New York med. Monatschr., 5, 281. 

*Bussola, Serafino (1834) De somniis, (Thesis) Ticini Reg. 

*Caetani-Lovatelli (1889) ‘I sogni e l’ipnotismo nel mondo antico’, Nuova 
AnloL, Dec. 1. 

Cane, Frances E. (1889) ‘The Physiology of Dreams’, The Lancet, 67 II, 
1330 (Dec. 28) 

Cardano, Girolamo (1562) Somiorum synesiorum, omnis generis insomnia 
explicantes libri IV, Bale. (2nd ed. in Opera omnia Cardani, 5, 593, 
Lyons, 1663.) 



648 


Bibliography 


Cariero, Alessandro (1575) De somniis deque divinatione per somnia, 
Padua. 

Carpenter (1849-52) ‘Dreaming’ (under ‘Sleep’), Cyclop, ofAnat. and Physiol., 
4, 687, London. 

Claviere (1897) La rapidite de la pensee dans le reve, Rev. phil., 43, 507. 

Coutts, G. A. (1896) 'Night-terrors’, Amer. J. med. Sc. D. L. (1895) Apro- 
pos de Fappreciation du temps dans le reve, Rev. phil., 40 , 69. 

Dagonet, H. (1889) ‘Du reve et du delire alcoolique’, Ann. med.-psychol.. Se- 
ries 7, 10 , 193. 

Dandolo, G. (1889) La conscienza nelsogno, Padua. 

Dechambre, A. (1880) ‘Cauchemar’, Diet, encycl. sc. med., 2, 48. 

*Dietrich, J. D. (1726) An ea, quae hominibus in somno et somnio accidunt, 
iisdem possint imputari? resp. Gava, Wittemberg. 

*Dochmasa, A. M. (1890) Dreams and their Significance as Forebodings ofiDi- 
sease, Kazan. 

Dreher, E. (1890) ‘Sinneswahrnehmung und Traumbild’, Reichs-med. An- 
zeiger, 15 , Nos. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24; 16 , Nos. 3, 8, Leipzig. 

Ducoste, M. (1899) ‘Les songes d’attaques des epileptiques’, Journ. Med. 
Bordeaux, Nov. 26 and Dec. 3. 

*Du Prel, C. (1869) ‘Oneirokritikon: der Traum vom Stand-punkte des 
transcend. Idealismus’, Deutsche Vierteljahr-schrifi, 2, Stuttgart. 

(1880) Psychologie der Lyrik, Leipzig. 

*(1889) ‘Kunstliche Traume’, Sphinx, July. 

Egger, V. (1888) ‘Le sommeil et la certitude, le sommeil et la memoire’, Cri- 
tique philos., 1 , 341, Paris. 

Elus, Havelock (1895) 'On Dreaming of the Dead’, Psychol. Rev. 2, 458. 

(1897) ‘A Note on hypnagogic Paramnesia’, Mind, 6 , 283. 

Erdmann, J. E. (1855) ‘Das Traumen’, Ernste Spiele, Chap. 12, Berlin. 

Erk, Vinz. von (1874) Uber den Unterschied von Traum und Wachen, Prague. 

*Escande de Messieres (1895) ‘Les reves chez les hysteriques’, (Thesis) 
Bordeaux. 

Faure (1876) ‘Etudes sur les reves morbides. Reves persistants’, Arch, gener. 
Med., 6th ser., 27 , 550. 

*Enizia (1896) ‘L’azione suggestiva delie cause esterne nei sogni’, Arch, per 
FAntrop., 26. 

*Fere, C. (1897) ‘Les reves d’acces chez les epileptiques’, Med. mod. Dec. 8. 

*Fischer, Joh. (1899) Ad artis veterum onirocriticae historiam symbole, (The- 
sis) Jena. 

*Florentin, V. (1899) ‘Das Traumleben: Plauderei’, Die alte und die neue 
Welt, 33, 725. 



Bibliography 


649 


Fornaschon, H. (1897) ‘Die Geschichte eines Traumes als Beitrag der 
Transcendentalpsychologie’, Psychische Studien, 24 , 274. 

Frensberg. (1885) ‘Schlaf und Traum’, Sammlang gemein-verst. tviss. Vortr., 
Virchow-Holtzendorf, Ser. 20, 466. 

Frerichs, J. H. (1866) Der Mensch: Traum, Herz, Verstand, Norden. 

Galen. De praecognitione, ad Epigenem, Lyons, 1540. 

*Girgensohn, L. (1845) Der Traum: psychol.-physiol. Versuch. 

*Gleichen-Russwurm, A. von (1899) Traum in der Dich-tung’, Nat. Z„ 
Nos. 553-559. 

*Gley, E. (1898) ‘Appreciation du temps pendant le sommeil’, L’interme- 
diaire des Biologistes, 10 , 228. 

Gorton, D. A. (1896) ‘Psychology of the Unconscious’, Amer. Med. Times, 
24 , 33, 37. 

Gould, G. M. (1889) ‘Dreams, Sleep, and Consciousness’, The Open Court 
(Chicago), 2, 1433-6 and 1444-7. 

*Grabener, G. C. (1710) Ex antiquitate judaica de menudim bachalom siv ex- 
communicatis per insomnia exerc. resp. Klebius, Wittemberg. 

Graffunder, P. C. (1894) ‘Traum und Traumdeutung,’ Samml. gemeinv. 
wiss. Vortrage, 197 . 

Greenwood, F. (1894) Imaginations in Dreams and their Study, London. 

*Grot, N. (1878) Dreams, a Subject of Scientific Analysis (in Russian), Kiev. 

Guardia, J. M. (1892) ‘La personnalite dans les reves’, Rev. Phil, 34 , 225. 

Gutfeldt, I. (1899) ‘Ein Traum’, Psychol. Studien, 26, 491. 

*Hampe, T. (1896) ‘Uber Hans Sachsen Traumgedichte’, Z. deutsch. Unter- 
richt, 10 , 616. 

Heerwagen (1889) ‘Statist Untersuch. uber Traumme u. Schlaf’, Philos. 
Stud., 5, 301. 

Hiller, G. (1899) ‘Traum, Ein Kapitel zu den zwolf Nachten’, Leipz. Tagbl. 
undAnz., No. 657, Suppl. 1. 

Httschmann, F. (1894) ‘Uber das Traumleben der Blinden*, Z. PsychoL, 7, 
387. 

Jastrow, J. (1888) The Dreams of the Blind’, New Princeton Rev., 5, 18. 

Jensen, J. (1871) Traumen und Denken’, Samml. gemeinv. wiss. Vortr., Vir- 
chow-Holtzendorff, Ser. 6, 134. 

Kingsford, A. (1888) Dreams and Dream-Stories, (ed. E. Maitland), Lon- 
don. (2nd ed.) 

Kloepfel, F. (1899) Traumerei and Traum: Allerlei aus unserem Traumle- 
ben’, Universum, 15 , 2469 and 2607. 

*Kramar, Old rich (1882) O spanku a snu, PragerAkad. Gymn. 

Krasnicki, E. von (1897) ‘Karls IV Wahrtraum’, Psych Stud., 24, 697. 



650 


Bibliography 


Kucera, E. (1895) ‘Aus dem Traumleben’, Mdhr-Weisskirchen, Gymn. 

Laistner, L. (1889) Das Rdtsel der Sphinx, (2 vols.), Berlin. 

* Landau, M. (1892) ‘Aus dem Traumleben’, Mtinchner Neueste Nachrichten, 
Jan. 9. 

Laupts. (1895) ‘Le foncdonnement cerebral pendant le reve et pendant le 
sommeil hypnotique’, Ann. med.-psychol., Ser. 8, 2, 354. 

*Leidesdorf, M. (1880) ‘Das Traumleben’, Sammlung der ‘Aima Mater’, 
Vienna. 

*Lerch, M. F. (1883-84) ‘Das Traumleben und sein Bedeu-tung’, Gymn. 
Progr., Komotau. 

*Liberali, Francesco (1834) Dei sogni, (Thesis) Padua. 

Li^beault, A. (1893) ‘A travers les etats passifs, le sommeil et les reves’, Rev. 
hypnot., 8, 41, 65, 106. 

Luksch, L. ( 1 894) Wunderbare Traumerfullung als Inhalt des wirklichen Le- 
bens, Leipzig. 

Macario, M. M. A. (1846) ‘Des reves, consideres sous le rapport physiolo- 
gique et pathologique’, Pt. I, Ann. med-psychol., 8, 170. 

(1889) ‘Des reves morbides’, Gaz. med. de Paris, 8, 1, 85, 97, 109, 121. 

Macfarlane, A. W. (1890) ‘Dreaming’, Edinb. med. ]., 36, 499. 

Maine de Biran, M. F. P. (1792) ‘Nouvelles Considerations sur le sommeil, 
les songes, et le sonnambulisme’, Gluvres Philosophiques, 209 (Ed. V. 
Cousin), Paris, 1841. 

Maury, L. F. A. (1857) ‘De certains faits observes dans les reves’, Ann. med.- 
psychol., Ser. 3, 3, 1 57. 

*Meisel (pseud.) (1783) Natiirlich-gditliche und teuflische Trdume, Seighart- 
stein. 

Melinand, M. C. (1898) ‘Dream and Reality,” Pop. Sc. Mo., 54, 96. 

Melzentin, C. (1899) ‘Uber wissenschaftliche Traumdeu-tung’, Gegenwart, 
50, Leipzig. 

Mentz, R. (1888) Die Trdume in den altfranzosischen Karls-und Artusepen, 
Marburg. 

Monroe, W. S. (1899) ‘A study of taste-dreams’, Am. I. Psychol., 10, 326. 

Moreau de La Sarthe, J. L. (1820) ‘Reve’, Diet. sc. med., 48, 245. 

Motet (1829-36) ‘Cauchemar’, Diet, med, chir. pratiques, Paris. 

Murray, J. C. (1894) ‘Do we ever dream of tasting?’ Proc. Am. psychol. Ass., 

20 . 

*Nagele, A. (1889) ‘Der Traum in der epischen Dichtung’, Programm der 
Realschule, Marburg. 

Newbold, W. R. (1896) ‘Sub-conscious Reasoning’, Proc. Soc. psychic. Res., 
12, 11, London. 



Bibliography 


651 


Passavanti, J. (1891) Libro dei sogni, Rome. 

Paulhan, F. (1894) ‘A propos de l’activite de l’esprit dans le reve’, Rev. phil, 
38 , 546. 

Pick, A. (1896) ‘Uber pathologische Traumerei und ihre Bezie-hungen zur 
Hysterie’, Jb. Psychiat., 14 , 280. 

*Ramm, K. (1889) Diss.pertractanssomn.ia, Vienna. 

*Regis, E. (1890) ‘Les reves Bordeaux’, La Gironde (Varietes), May 31. 
Richard, Jerome (1766) La theorie des songes, Paris. 

Richardson, B. W. (1892) ‘The Physiology of Dreams’, Asclep., 9 , 129. 
Richier, E. (1816) Oneirologie ou dissertation sur les songes, consideres dans 
I’etat de maladie, (Thesis) Paris. 

* Richter, J. P. (Jean Paul) (1813) ‘Blicke in die Traum-welf, Museum, 2, 
(also in Werke, ed. Hempel, 44, 128.) 

*‘Uber Wahl-und Halbtraume’, Werke, 44 , 142. 

(1826-33) Wahrheit aus Jean Paids Le ben. 

Robinson, L. (1893) ‘What Dreams are made of, N. Am. Rev., 157 , 687. 
Rousset, C. (1876) Contribution h I’etude du cauchemar, (Thesis) Paris. 
Roux, J. (1898) ‘Le reve et les delires onitiques’, Province med. Lyons, 12 , 
212 . 

*Ryff, W. H. (1554) Traumbiichlein, Strassburg. 

*Santel, A. (1874) ‘Poskus raz kladbe nekterih pomentjivih prokazni spanja 
in sanj’, Progr. Gymn., Gorz. 

Sarlo, F. de (1887) / sogni. Saggio psicologico, Naples. 

Sch. Fr. (1897) ‘Etwas Uber Traume’, Psych. Studien, 24, 686. 

Schleich, K. L. (1899) ‘Schlaf und Traum’, Zukunjt, 29 , 14, 54. 
Schwartzkopff, P. (1887) Das Leben im Traum: eine Studie, Leipzig. 
Stevenson, R. L. (1892) ‘A Chapter on Dreams’, Across the Plain. 

Stryk, M. von (1899) ‘Der Traum und die Wirklichkeit’, (after C. Meli- 
nand), Baltische Msche, 189, Riga. 

Sully, J. (1881) Illusions, a Psychological Study, London. 

(1882) ‘Etudes sur les reves’, Rev. scientif., Ser. 3, 3 , 385. 

(1892) The Human Mind, (2 vols.), London. 

(1875-89) ‘Dreams’, Enc. Brit., 9th ed. 

Summers, T. O. (1895) ‘The Physiology of Dreaming’, St. Louis Clin., 8, 401 . 
Surbled, G. (1895) ‘Origine des reves’, Rev. quest, scient. (1898) Le reve, Paris. 
Synesius of Syrene Liber de insomniis. 

[ German trans.: Oneiromantik by Krauss, Vienna, 1888.] 

Tannery, M. P. (1894) “Sur l’activite de l’esprit dans le reve’, Rev. phil., 38 , 
630. 

(1898) ‘Sur la paramnesie dans les reves’, Rev. phil., 46 , 420. 



652 


Bibliography 


ThiIiry, A. (1896) ‘Aristote et la psychologie physiologique du reve’, Rev. 
neo-scol., 3, 260. 

*Thomayer, S. (1887) ‘Contributions to the Pathology of Dreams’ (in 
Czech), Policlinic of the Czech University, Prague. 

Tissie, P. (1896) ‘Les reves; reves pathogenes et therapeutiques; reves photo- 
graphies’, Journ. med. Bordeaux, 36, 293, 308, 320. 

Titchener, E. B. (1895) ‘Taste Dreams’, Am. J. Psychol., 6, 505. 

Tonnini, S. (1887) ‘Suggestione e sogni ' , Arch, psichiatr. antrop. crirn., 8, 264 

*Tonsor, J. H. (1627) Disp. de vigilia, somno et somniis, prop. Lucas, 
Marburg. 

Tuke, D. H. (1892) ‘Dreaming’, Diet, of Psychol. Med. (ed. Tuke), London. 

Ullrich, M. W. (1 896) Der Schlaf und das Traumleben, Geisteskrafi und Geis- 
tesschwdche, (3rd ed.), Berlin. 

Unger, F. (1898) Die Magie des Traumesals Unsterblich-keitsbeweis. Nebste. Vor- 
wort: Okkultismus und Sozial-ismus von C. du Prel, (2nd ed.), Munster. 

Vignoli, T. (1879) Mito e scienza: Saggio, Milan. 

[Trans.: Myth and Science: An Essay, London, 1882 (Chap. VIII).] 

*Vischer, F. T. (1876) ‘Studien iiber den Traum’, Beilage allg. Z., 105. 

Vold, J. Mourly (1897) ‘Einige Experimente iiber Gesichts-bilder im 
Traume’, Report of 3rd. Psych. Congr., Munich, and Z. Psychol. Physiol. 
Sinnerorgane, 13, 66. 

*Vykoukal, F. V. (1898) On Dreams and Dream-interpretations, (in Czech) 
Prague. 

Wedel, R. (1899) ‘Untersuchungen auslandischer Gelehrter iiber gew. 
Traumphanomene’, Beitr. zur Grenzwissenschaft, p. 24. 

*Wehr, H. (1887) ‘Das Unbewusste im menschlichen Denken’, Programm 
der Oberrealschule, Klagenfurt. 

Weill, A. (1872) Qu’est-ce que le revel Paris. 

*Wendt, K. (1858) Kriemhilds Traum, (Thesis) Rostock. 

Wilks, S. (1893-94) ‘On the Nature of Dreams’, Med. Mag., 2, 597, London. 

Williams, H. S. (1891-92) ‘The Dream State and its Psychic Correlatives, 
Amer. J. Insanity, 48, 445. 

Woodworth, R. S. (1897) ‘Note on the Rapidity of Dreams’, Psychol. Rev., 
4, 524. 

*(1886) ‘Ce qu’on peut rever en cinq secondes’, Rev. sc, 3rd. ser., 11, 572. 

Zuccarelli (1894-95) ‘Polluzioni notturne ed epilepsia’, L’anomalo, 1, 2, 3. 



INDEX OF DREAMS 


A 

FREUD’S OWN DREAMS 


Anna Freud’s wish for strawberries, 

154-155 

Anxiety dream, 581-582 
Augean stables, 475-477 
Autodidasker, 315-319, 497-498 

Bisexuality theory, 346-347 
Botanical monograph, 193-197, 
299-302, 322, 473 

Children, birth of, 484 
Children, excursions with, 152-153 
Children, satisfaction with, 

454-455 

Death and memorial of friends 
(Non vixit), 430-434, 
485-490, 517-518 
Death of his father, 333-334, 
436-437, 444-447, 455 

Disagreeable fellow travelers 
[change carriea], 522 
Dishonesty, 351-352 

Etruscan urn, 149 
Evisceration, 459-462, 482 

Functional phenomena, 507-508 


Goethe’s attack on Herr M., 342, 
447-449, 456-457 
Graves’ disease, 287-288, 556 

Horseback riding, 249-252 

Irma’s injection, 131—145, 161, 
309-313, 323, 332, 338,356, 
517, 537 

Lamp carried by colleague, 191 

Neologisms, 313, 315-320 

Pope’s death, 252 

Proper names in dreams, 422 

Punishment dream, 481—482 

Recent events as source of, 188-189 
Rome, 215-219, 449-452 

Schoolmaster and doctor, 50 
Son as a gallant soldier, 558-560 
Stairs, inhibited movement on, 
257-259, 265 

Telegram, 333 
Thirst dreams, 149 


653 



654 


Index of Dreams 


Three Fates, 225-229, 252-253 
Thun, Count, 229-239, 440-442 
Town council, 444-447, 457-459 
Train carriages, changing, 462-466 
Travel to Florence, 190 


Warships near the castle by the sea, 
470-473 

Yellow-bearded uncle, 162-166, 
310-311,322, 338, 478, 569 


B 

Other People’s Dreams 


Anxiety dreams, 582-585 
Arrest fantasy, 498-500 

Barrel-maker’s boys, 222—223 
Bismarck’s riding whip, 388-392 
Blossoming branch, 335, 340, 
361-363 

Bonjour’s fantasy of the theater, 
502-503 

Books in a trunk, 210 
Buildings, stairs, and shafts, 
377-378 

Burning child, 513-515, 536, 570 

Calculations in, 425-427 
Candles in a candlestick, 

209-210 

Castration dreams, 379, 421 
‘Channel’ joke, 521—522 
Chemist’s masturbation dream, 
393-394 

Children, death of, 176-180, 
469-470 

Children, excursions with, 153—154 
Clothing and colors, 421 
Composite localities, 341 
Cooling apparatus on her face, 
150-151 

Death as the great Unknown, 
478-479 


Delboeuf s Asplenium dream, 

45-46 

Dental dream, 399-403 

Father, death of, 434-437 
Feeling of reality and representation 
of repetition, 383-385 
Food that is unavailable, 285-286 

Genitals and intercourse, symbols 
of, 375-376 
Ghosts, 546-547 
Green faces and red eyes, 546 
Guillotine dream, 58-59, 93, 
500-502, 574 

Hat symbolism, 373-375 
Hervey’s dream of a golden-haired 
woman, 47 

‘Innocent’ dreams, 220—221, 
407-408, 429 

Intra-uterine experience and birth 
symbolism, 410 

Judgement against another’s 
fiancee, 552 

Language of Flowers, 331-332 
Lilies of the valley, 453-454 
Lions in the desert, 468-469 



Index of Dreams 


655 


Market, late to the, 206-207 
May-beetle dream, 307-309 
Money and numbers, 423—425 
Mother-in-law’s visit, 175-176 
Myops, 286, 45 1 

Neologisms, 314, 321 
Numbers, 424-425 

Oedipus dreams, 409n 
Opera dreams, 356-358, 
396-398, 443 

Orthopedic institute, 221-222 

Paper hat, 422-423 
Patient’s obstacle to continuing 
treatment, 181-182 
People and landscapes as sexual 
symbols, 379 

Piano, worthlessness of, 208 
Policeman dream, 426—427 
Praise of ‘Brugnolus,’ 46 
Pregnant servant girl, 347 


Puns and turns of speech, 415-423, 
429-430 

Rosegger’s hypocritical dream, 
479-481 

Rushing and falling, 220—221, 
223-224, 271 

Sappho dream, 302-307, 

322, 342 

Sensory stimuli as dream material, 
55-60 

Staircase dreams, 380-385 

Supper-party, 171-173 

Symbolism in the dreams of normal 
persons, 385-388 

Unintentional revelation of 
liaison, 454 

Unmodified occurrences, 53-54 

Weak spots in, 519 

Winter overcoat, 208-209 




GENERAL INDEX 


Absurdity, 354, 356-358, 425 
dreams of a father’s death, 

434-437 

Freud’s dream of Goethe’s attack 
on Herr M., 456-457 
Freud’s dream of his father’s 

death, 444-447, 455 

Freud’s dream of Rome, 

449-452 

in dream-thought elements, 

442-443, 452-453 

number play in Freud’s dream of 
Goethe, 447—449 
Accelerating the course of dreams, 
571 

Accidents in dreams, 54 
Adam Bede (Eliot), 307-308 
Affect, 267 

anxiety dreams, 580 
apparent absence of, 468-473 
content and, 466-468 
distortion in dreams, 165-166, 
169 

Freud’s evisceration dream, 482 
punishment dream, 481-482, 

484-485 

reversal of, 477-479 
suppression of, 473-477 
Affection, 169 
Age, 418-419, 446-447 
Alcoholism, dreams and, 1 14—1 15 
Alexander ofMacedon, 124— 125n 


Ambition, 162, 213-215, 237-238 
Ancient civilizations 

Artemidorus’s study of dream 
interpretation, 123n 
demonic and divine nature of 
dreams, 36-38 
dream-books, 124— 125n 
historical significance of dreams, 
608-609 

in dream content, 218-219 
moral sense in dreams, 95 
nakedness and inhibition, 265 
Oedipus dreams, 278-281, 
408-409n 

theory of dreams, 102 
therapeutic value of dreams, 65n 
waking life, dependence of dream 
content on, 42-43 
wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 157n, 
159n, 569 

Andersen, Hans Christian, 261—262 
Animals, 212, 249-251 
dreams by, 155, 157, 157n 
lions, 468-469 
May-beetle dream, 307-308 
wordplay on, 415 
Anti-semitism, 161n, 162—164, 
218-219, 233-234 
Antiquity. See Ancient civilizations 
Anxiety dreams, 160 

dreams of the death of a loved 
one, 284 


657 



658 


General Index 


Anxiety dreams (cont.) 

emission dreams, 412—413 
examination (test-taking) dreams, 
291-293 
falling, 405 

Freud’s dream of the death and 
memorial of friends, 486-487 
function of, 578-585 
illness, 66 

inhibited movement, 352 
inhibition dreams, 257-259 
intra-uterine experience and 
birth symbolism, 410 
nakedness, 265 

postponed interpretation of, 525 
robbers, burglars, and ghosts, 414 
wish-fulfilment, 183-185, 256 
Apples, 304-305 

Arab dream interpreters, 123-124n 
Aristotle, 36-37, 65, 122n 
Arousal during dreaming, 575-576 
Arrest fantasy, 498-500 
Arsenic, 307-309 
Artabanus, 42 

Artemidorus of Daldis, 37-38, 123, 
123n-125n 

Association, xiv, 71, 242 

botanical monograph dream, 
301-302 

condensation of dream-thought, 
298 

displacement, 324 
Associative dreams, 71-72 
Auditory images and stimuli, 64, 

79, 244 

Auto-symbolic substitutes for 
thought, 359-360 
Automobiles, 419 
Awareness of dreaming, 570-571 

Bedwetting, 237, 383, 405, 414 
Beetles, 307-309 

Belief: reality of dream-image and, 
80-81 


Bells, 60,252,314-315 
Benini, V., 75, 98 
Bernard, Claude, 526 
Biblical dreams and figures, 349, 
391-392 

Binz, C., 52, 85, 103 
Biographical dreams, 362 
Birth dreams, 410—412, 41 In, 
413-414 

Bisexual symbols, 372 
Bisexuality, 346-347, 407, 569 
Bismarck, Otto von, 389-392 
Bodily functions, 237-238, 
245-247,412. See also 
Emission dreams; Urination 
Bonatelli, F., 75 
Bonjour, Casimir, 502 
Books, forbidden, 308 
Botanical material, 45-46, 213, 
233-235, 340, 361-363, 
385-388, 453-454 
Botanical monograph, 193-197, 
299-302, 322, 473 
Boxes in dreams, 178, 416 
Breakfast-ship, 472-473 
Breuer, Josef, 125-126, 487n 
Briicke, Ernst, xvi, 487-488, 

487n, 489 

Buildings and places in dreams, 48, 
377-379 

Burdach, K. F„ 41,80, 105, 
108-109, 2 44 

Cab, 440-442 
Caesar, Julius, 408-409n 
Cake, 359 

Calculations, 425-427, 427n 
Calkins, Mary Whiton, 242 
Camellias, 335, 340, 362 
Candles, 209-210 
Castration, 376, 379, 397-398n, 
408-409n, 421-422n 
Causal relations between 

dream-thoughts, 331-332 



General Index 


659 


Caviare, 172-173, 341,450 
Censorship, 611—612 
affect and, 468, 485 
chronological relations of 
dream-processes, 574-575 
death of a person of whom the 
dreamer is fond, 27 1 
distortion disguising 

wish-fulfilment, 167—168, 
167n, 183 

dreams as a wish to prolong 
sleep, 254-255 
dreams of death of a loved 
one, 284 

forbidden books, 308 
Freud’s dream of friends’ death 
and memorial, 490—491 
Freud’s self-analysis, 235-236 
intensity and value of 
dream-images, 345 
representability and, 354-355 
representation through 
identification, 337-338 
reversals, 343 
revision, 518-520 
secondary revision, 494 
superficial associations, 

533-535 

suppression of affect, 474-475 
through displacement, 325-326, 
325n 

wish-fulfilment and, 551 
Cessation of dreams, 82-84 
Characteristics of dreams, 
psychological, 77-93 
Childhood experience 

as source of dreams, 211-240 
Augean Stables dream, 476 
bedwetting, 405-406 
Bismarck’s dream, 391-392 
bodily functions, 221-223 
botanical dreams, 195-196 
characteristics of memory in 
dreams, 188 


death-wishes against parents, 
276-278 

dream formation process, 

566-567, 586 

flying and falling, 288-290, 403 
Freud’s botanical monograph 
dream, 300 

Freud’s dishonesty dream, 352n 
Freud’s dream content, 225-229 
Freud’s dream of friends’ 
deaths, 433 
gigantic figures, 62n 
importance in dream-thoughts 
and content, 547-548 
indifferent material in dreams, 
188n, 195-196 
infantile roots of unconscious 
wishes, xviii 

‘innocent’ dreams, 223—224 
intra-uterine experience and 
birth symbolism, 410 
Language of Flowers, 331-332 
latent content of dreams, 
239-240 

memory as source of dream 
material, 48-49, 54 
nakedness and inhibition, 265 
sexual assault, 207-208 
sexual episodes, 219-220, 
236-238 

staircase dream, 381-382 
unification of material, 248 
wet-nurse memories, 226, 
305-306, 306n 

women’s experiences, 220—222 
Children 

affect and content, 467n 
anxiety dreams, 160 
birth of Freud’s, 484 
castration dreams, 379 
death-wishes against parents, 
273-276, 284-288, 344 
death-wishes against siblings, 
267-273 



660 


General Index 


Children (cont.) 

distortion disguising wish- 
fulfilment, 176—180 
dreams of the death of, 469-470, 
513-515, 536 
flying and falling, 288-290 
Freud’s concerns about the 
upbringing of, 317, 319 
Freud’s dream of Irma’s 
injection, 310 

Freud’s dream of Rome, 449-452 
Freud’s satisfaction with, 454-455 
illegitimate, 453-454 
nakedness, 262-263 
pregnancy, dreams announcing, 
151-152 

Shakespeare’s treatment of, 283 
symbolizing genitalia, 375-376 
symbols of a mother’s drive to 
have, 386-387 

transference of love to, 491—492 
wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 
151-156n, 553 
Choice of memories, 51—52 
Chronological relations of dream- 
processes, 574-575 
Chronological reversals, 343, 412 
Cicero, 43 

Clarity, 346-350, 453-454 
Clocks, 60 

Clothing in dreams, 69, 225, 228, 
257-266, 341, 420-421. See 
also Nakedness in dreams 
Coal, 356-357 
Cocaine, 135-136, 140-141, 

194-197, 228, 238, 299-300 
Coenaesthesia, 67-68, 75, 243, 256 
Collaterals, 327-328n 
Collective figures, 310-311 
Colors, 236-237, 251, 420-421 
Commonality, 337-338 
Complementary dreams, 41 
Composite figures, 310-311, 
335-341 


Condensation, 202n, 511 
botanical monograph dream, 
299-302 

dream-content and dream- 
thought, 296-297 
Freud’s Autodidasker dream, 
315-319,488 
Freud’s dream of Irma’s 
injection, 309-313 
Freud’s evisceration dream, 459 
intensity of dream-images, 
345-346 

May-beetle dream, 307-309 
representability and, 354-355 
Sappho dream, 302-307 
through neologisms, 3 1 3-32 1 
unconscious, role in process, 592 
Condoms, 209 
Confusion, 346-350 
Consciousness, 610 

alteration of mental acitvity in 
dreams, 86-87 
associations between 
dream-images, 87-89 
choice of material for 
reproduction, 52-53 
derivation of dream material 
from memory, 44-54 
drawing dream-images, 204n 
essential difference between 
dream life and, 78-93 
fragmentary nature of dream 
material, 53-54 
indifferent material in 
dreams, 201 

internal organic somatic 
stimuli, 67 

pre-scientific view of dreams, 
38-39 

psychical apparatus, 541-545 
psychical sources of stimulation, 
70-71 

recent material in dreams, 
201-202 



General Index 


661 


relation of dreams to, 41-44 
secondary revision, 505-506 
spatial, 80 

theory of dreaming, 102-108 
unconscious and consciousness, 

605-615 

unpleasure principle, 573-574 
See also Memory 
Consonance, 335-341 
Constancy, law of, xvi 
Constancy, Principle of, 565n 
Content of dreams 
affect and, 473 
decoding method of 
interpretation, 123 
indifferent material, 193-199 
internal processes as dream- 
instigators, 202-203, 231 
manifest and latent, 160-161, 
160n, 510n 
memory, 44-5 4 
recent material, 188-192 
stimuli connections, 243 
transformation of dream-thought 
into, 510-511 

unification of material, 201-203 
See also Childhood experience; 
Sexual stimuli and elements; 
Symbolism 

Contradictions, 329-330, 332- 
334, 341-344, 352 
Contraries, 332-334, 341-344 
Convenience, dreams of, 147-150, 
253 

Convergence, enforced, 202n 
Counter-wish dreams, 181 
Crime, 94-95, 163-164 
Critical observation, 126-127 
Cruelty to animals, 307-308 
Cyclamen monograph, 1 93-20 1 , 
213, 299-302, 473 

Daudet, Alphonse, 303, 496 
David, J. ]., 317 


Davidson, Wolf, 90 
Day-dreams and daytime thoughts, 
496-497, 536-537, 560-561 
De remm natura (Lucretius), 42-43 
Death in dreams, 59 

absence of affect in dreams of, 
471-472 

as the Great Unknown, 478-479 
birth dreams, 41 In 
burial at sea, 472 
children’s death-wishes, 267-276, 
284-288, 3 44 
children’s deaths, 469-470 
death of a person of whom the 
dreamer is fond, 266-288 
distortion disguising wish- 
fulfilment, 176—180 
frequent and absurd appearance 
of dead people, 438-439 
Freud’s dream of his father’s 
funeral, 333-334 
illness, 66 

Stekel’s interpretation, 370-371 
typical dreams of, 396 
Death of Freud’s patient, 136, 142 
Decoding method of dream 

interpretation, 123, 128-129 
Delage, Yves, 107-108 
Delboeuf, I., 45-46, 53-54, 80-81, 
89, 102-103, 130 
Delire, 87-88, 87n 
Delirium, 116-117 
Delusions, 207-208n. See also 
Hallucinations 

Demonic nature of dreams, 36-37, 
54, 608-609 

Dental dreams. See Teeth in dreams 
Destiny, 278-281 
Diffuse general sensibility, 256 
Diptheria, 311 

Displacement, 200-201, 203-205, 
311, 322-326, 338, 353-356, 
477-479 

Dissimulation, 166-167 



662 


General Index 


Distortion in dreams, 159-185 
anxiety as wish-fulfilment, 
183-185 

children’s death-wishes against 
parents, 285-286 
counter-wish dreams, 181 
disguised wish-fulfilment, 
167-168, 176-180 
embarassment at being naked, 
261-262 

exchanging one person for 
another, 136-137 
experimentation with sexual 
symbols, 395 

hypocritical dreams disguising 
wish-fulfilment, 161—173 
hysterical identification, 173-175 
indifferent material as dream 
source, 198-201 
infantile material, 240 
’innocent’ dreams, 205 
love services, ambiguity of, 
167-168n 

obstacles to interpretation, 528 
origins of, 161 
reversals, 343 
revision, 518-520 
through displacement, 325-326, 
325n 

See also Censorship 
Divine nature of dreams, 36-39, 54 
Drawing dream images, 204n 
Dream-book, 123-125, 124n, 245, 
364-365 

Dream-images 
drawing, 204n 
forgetting dreams, 74 
hypnagogic hallucinations, 63-64 
ideas and, 90n 

Dream-imagination, 588-589 
Dream-life 

associations between 
dream-images, 87-89 
testing reality, 80-82 


Dream-thought, 586 

botanical monograph dream, 
301-302 

causal relations between, 331-332 
childhood experience and, 
212-215 

condensation, 296-321 
displacement, 322-326 
dream formation process, 
593-594 

expressing contraries and 
contradictories, 332-334 
logical relations between, 328-331 
transformation into dream 
content, 510-511 
Dream-wishes, 560-563. See also 
Wish-fulfilment, dreams as 
Dream-work. See Condensation; 

Displacement; Representation, 
means of; Symbolism 
Dreamer, character and 

circumstance of, 123-124 
Du Prel, C., 297n, 607n 
Dugas, L., 84, 88 
Dysentery, 138-139, 311 

Ego, 110 

altruistic dreams, 288n 
children’s death-wishes against 
parents, 284-285 
dreams as a wish to prolong 
sleep, 254 

Freud’s dream of Goethe, 448 
Freud’s dream of Rome, 

449-452 

representation through 

identification, 338-339, 339n 
Eliot, George, 307-308 
Ellis, Havelock, 52, 88, 192, 205n, 
366, 385, 505 
Embellishing dreams, 76 
Emission dreams, 257n, 332, 350, 
380-385, 399-403, 405, 

412, 571 



General Index 


663 


Emotions. See Affect 
The Emperor’s New Clothes 
(Andersen), 261—262 
Epileptic disorders, 114 
Erdmann, J. E., 98 
Etruscans, 462, 472 
Evisceration, 459-462, 482 
Examination (test-taking) dreams, 
291-293, 396 

Excretion theory, 105-106, 577, 588 
Exhibitionism, 262—263 
Experimentally produced dreams, 
243n 

External objective sensory stimuli, 
xviii, 55-62, 8 In, 87-90, 
241-242, 244-245, 249-257, 
290, 586-587 

Extravagance in dreams, 285n 
Eyes, 408n, 430-431,435, 

486-487 

Falling asleep, 62-64, 78-80, 83-84 
Falling in dreams, 59, 69, 223—224, 
288-290, 403 
False connections, 504 
Family and friends 

adults’ death-wishes against, 
276-278, 287-288 
childhood experiences, 213-215, 
221-222 

children’s death-wishes against 
parents, 273-276 
children’s death-wishes against 
siblings, 266—288 
death of relatives, 176-178 
distortion in dreams disguising 
wish-fulfilment, 163—165 
Freud’s dream of the death and 
memorial of friends, 485-490 
personal and professional 
involvement, 130-131 
Stekel’s interpretation of 
symbols, 371 
Fantasy, 496-497 


Faust (Goethe), 104n, 166n, 

30 In, 304 

Features of dreams, 80 
Fechner, G. T„ 78, 84, 538 
Ferenczi, S., 263n, 365n, 380, 388, 
478, 571 
Fichte, I. H., 98 
Fire, 513-515 
Fliegende Blatter, 504-505 
Fliess, Wilhelm, xiii-xiv, xviii-xix, 
119, 285n, 312, 315-316, 

342, 430, 456, 486 
Flowers, 233-235, 361-363, 
385-388, 453-454. See also 
Botanical monograph 
Flying in dreams, 69, 246-247, 
288-290, 396, 403 
Food and drink in dreams, 47 
auto-symbolic subsitutes for 
thought, 359-360 
childhood memories in dreams, 
225-227 

distortion disguising 

wish-fulfilment, 171-173, 198 
external stimuli affecting 
dreams, 251 

extravagance in dreams, 285-286 
feeling of reality and 

representaiton of repetition, 

383-385 

Freud’s dream of his father’s 
death, 444—446 
fruit, 304-305 
hunger dreams, 154-155 
puns and turns of speech, 
429-430 

recent material in dreams, 192n 
thirst dreams, 148-150, l49n, 
252 

wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 
153-155, 155n, 157, 157n 
Foreign language, 45 
Forgetting dreams, 73-77, 297, 
521-535 



664 


General Index 


Formal characteristics of 

representation, 344-346, 511 
France, Anatole, 108n 
Friends. See Family and friends 
Fruit, 304-305 

Function of dreaming, 101-113, 
577-580, 588 

Functional phenomena, 390, 
421-422n, 507-508 
Fur in dreams, 60, 1 12, 412 

Genitalia. See Sexual stimuli and 
elements 

Germs of life, 104, 104n 
Ghosts, 414, 430, 546-547 
Girou de Buzareingues, C. and I., 57 
Glosses on dreams, 347-348 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 
104n, 166n, 171-173, 228, 

30 In, 304, 335, 342, 367, 
437n, 447-449, 456, 608 
Gold, 413 

Gomperz, Theodor, 123n 
Greece. See Ancient civilizations 
Groesinger, W., 116 
Guillotine, 58-59, 93, 500-502, 
574 

Gulliver’s Travels (Swift), 62, 62n, 
475-476 

Haffner, P., 41, 81n, 94, 96 
Haggard, Rider, 459-460 
Hallam, Florence, 160 
Hallucinations, 114-117 
hypnagogic, 63-64 
independence from space and 
time, 8 In 

internal organic somatic 
stimuli, 68 

replacing thoughts with 
images, 79 

transference of ideas, 87-90 
Hamlet (Shakespeare), 282-283, 
283n, 452, 452n 


Hannibal, 218—219 
Hartmann, Eduard von, 531-532n 
Hat, symbolism of, 373-375, 
422-423 
Healing, 109 

relation of dreams to waking 
life, 41 

Heat and cold, 56-58 
Hegel, G. W. F„ 84 
Heine, Heinrich, 443n 
Helmholtz, Hermann von, xvi, 608 
Hercules, 475-477 
Heroes, 218-219 
Herophilus, 157n 
Hervey de St. Denys, Marie-Jean- 
Leon Lecoq Marquis de, 
46-47, 58, 89, 90n, 571 
Hildebrandt, F. W., 43-44, 48, 
51-53, 85, 95-96, 99 
Hilferding, M., 479 
Hippocrates, 413 
Historical scenes in dreams, 
231-233 

Historical significance of dreams, 
608-609 

Hoffbauer, J. C., 56 
Homosexuality, 396, 407 
Horses, 249-251, 389-392, 417 
Hostility, 486 
Hunger dreams, 252-253 
Hypermnesic dreams, 46-49, 586 
Hypnagogic hallucinations, 

63-64, 79 
Hypnosis, 172 

Hypocritical dreams disguising 
wish-fulfilment, 161—170, 
479-481 

Hysterical identification, 173-175 
Hysterical symptoms, 609, 
612-613 

building from trivia, 239n 
chronological reversal, 343n 
convergence of unconscious and 
preconscious, 568-569 



General Index 


665 


fantasies of sexual misconduct by 
doctors, 207-208 
Freud’s dream of Irma, 131-145 
male hysteria, 446 
neologisms in dreams, 320 
wish-fulfilment in dreams, 
175-176 

Ibsen, Henrik, 313 
Ideational process, 71-72, 75, 

267, 467 

Identification, 173-175, 335-341 
Identity, roots of symbols and, 365 
Illness 

childhood experience in dreams, 
213, 217, 223-224 
cocaine use, 194-195 
diagnostic and therapeutic value 
of dreams, 65-68 
distortion disguising wish- 
fulfilment, 175-176 
Freud’s difficulty in diagnosing, 
318 

Freud’s dream of Irma’s 

injection, 131-145, 309-313 
inhibited movement in dreams, 
303 

pain affecting dreams, 250-251 
wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 

150-151, 154-155, 155n, 287 
Illusions, 61, 101, 244 
Imaginative visual phenomena, 63, 
110-111 

Impatience in dreams, 211 
Impotence, 209-210, 377-378, 

479 

Incest, 280-281 
Incoherence, 84n 
Indifferent material in dreams, 
193-199, 203-205 
Inertia principle, xviii 
Infanticide, 179-180 
Infantile material. See Childhood 
experience 


Inhibited movement, 350-352 
Inhibition, 256— 266 
‘Innocent’ dreams, 205—210, 220— 
221, 223-224, 407-408, 429 
Inquisition, The, 97n 
Insanity, 114—116 
Insects, 307-309 
Intensity, psychical and sensory, 
323n, 344-346, 511, 555- 
556, 561, 575, 592-593 
Internal organic somatic stimuli, 
65-70 

childhood memories, 231 
clothing and colors in dreams, 
421 

combining with external stimuli 
to produce dreams, 254-256 
dream-imagination, 111—112 
external nervous stimuli and, 
241-242 

organic needs struggling with the 
need for sleep, 257n 
transference of ideas into 
illusions, 87-90 
urinary symbols, 380 
urinary symbols and stimuli, 
412-413 

See also Sexual stimuli and 
elements 

Internal subjective sensory 
excitations, 62-65 
Intestinal stimuli, 413 
Involuntary ideas, 99-101, 526, 
529-531 

Involuntary thoughts, 127-128 

Jensen, Wilhelm, 122n 
Jessen, P„ 42, 56, 76, 99-100 
Jews, 215-219, 450 
Jodi, F„ 86 

Jones, Ernest, 288n, 398n, 411 
Joseph (Biblical figure), 122 
Josephus, 349 
Judgement, 456-459 



666 


General Index 


Julius Caesar (Shakespeare), 
432-433 

Jung, C. G., 349, 398n 

Kant, Immanuel, 98, 115, 507 
Keller, Gottfried, 265, 4l7n 
Krauss, F. S., 68 

Ladd, G. Trumbull, 64-65 
Landscapes, 379, 381, 

409-410 

Language 

absurdity in, 437, 445-446 
childhood experience in 
dreams, 213, 234-235 
condensation through 
neologisms, 313-320 
distortion disguising meaning, 
206-208 

dream-books, 124n-125n 
false connections, 505 
Freud’s dream of the death 
and memorial of friends, 
485-486 

memory as source of dream 
material, 45 

neologisms in Freud’s dream of 
Rome, 449-45 1 
puns and turns of speech, 
415-423, 430-434, 437, 
441-442, 485-486, 
521-522n, 523-524 
riddle in Freud dream of 
Count Thun, 441—442 
sexual connections of symbols, 
365n 

speeches, 427-430 
symbolic connections, 365 
symbolic transformation of 
genitalia with upper body 
parts, 398 

symbols for sexual images, 
360-361 

travel dreams, 217 


wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 1 57 
word sounds linking 
dream-images, 88 
Lasker, Eduard, 316-317, 316n 
Lassalle, Ferdinand, 316-317, 316n 
Latent content, 160-161, 160n, 
165-166, 187-188,212-213, 
239-240, 322-326, 51 On. 

See also Dream-thought 
Lemoine, A., 84-85 
Limp position, 70 
Lions, 468-469 
Lipps, T., 244, 606-607 
Lizards, 45-46 

Location of dreams, 78, 339, 538 
Love services, 167-168n 
Lucretius, 42-43 
Luggage, 224 
‘Lynkeus,’ 120, 325n 

Maass, J. G. E., 42 
Macbeth (Shakespeare), 283 
Macrobius, 37-38 
Male hysteria, 446 
Manifest content, 160— 161, 160n, 
187-188, 510n 
factors in transforming latent 
thought into, 326-327 
latent content and, 295-296 
recent events as dream material, 
197-198, 239-240 
Marriage, 107, 307-309, 356-358, 
424-425, 499-500 

Masochism, 182 

Masturbation, 209-210, 378, 383, 
391-394, 396, 400-403, 418, 
546, 584 

Material of dreams. See Content 
of dreams 
Matura, 292n 

Maury, L. F. A., 42-43, 49-50, 
57-59, 61, 84-86, 88-90, 
100-101, 211, 500-502 
May-beetle dream, 307-309 



General Index 


667 


Meier, G. F., 56 
Memory, 44-54 

alteration of mental acitvity in 
dreams, 86 

choice of reproduced material, 
51-52 

condensation of dream-content, 
297 

conscious and, 61 1-612 
forgetting dreams, 73-77 
fragmentary nature of dream 
material, 53-54 
hysterical symptoms, 613 
internal processes as 

dream-instigators, 202-203 
psychical apparatus, 540-541 
thirst dreams, 149, l49n 
three characteristics of, 187-188, 
239-240 

See also Childhood experience; 
Consciousness 
Menstruation, 335 
Mental activity, 86 
Mental disease, 113-117, 589 
associations between 
dream-images, 87-89 
internal organic somatic 
stimuli, 67 
nakedness, 263 
translation of symbols, 364 
Meyer, Conrad Ferdinand, 476 
Micturation. See Urination 
Mind, concept of the, 607n 
Moi splanchnique, 67 
Money, 423-425 
Moral sense in dreams, 93-101 
Motor paralysis, xv 
Movement, inhibited, 350-352 
Murder, 179-180, 278-281, 465. 

See also Death in dreams 
Music in dreams, 47, 230, 427^28n 

Nakedness in dreams, 69, 260-266, 
340-341 


Names, misuse of, 226-23 1 
Napoleon, 253 
Nelson, J., 51 

Neologisms, 313-321. See also Puns 
and turns of speech 
Nervous stimulation, 71. See also 
Stimuli and source of dream 
material 

Neurone theory, xvi-xviii, 541-542 
Neurophysiology, xvi 
Neuroses, dreams and, 129-130 
Nightmares, 38 
Novalis, 109 

Numbers, 423-425, 446-447, 517 

Obsessional thoughts, 32 In, 465 
Oedipus dreams, xviii, 378, 
383-384, 408-409n, 

408-410 

Oedipus Rex (Sophocles), 278-281 
Offenbach, Jacques, 493-494 
Opera dreams, 356-358, 396-398, 
443 

Organic stimuli. See Internal 
organic somatic stimuli 
Orgasm, 257n, 332, 350, 382, 412 
Overdetermination of dream 
elements, 324, 508, 569 

Pain 

affecting dreams, 56-57, 612 
death of a person of whom the 
dreamer is fond, 267 
genital pain, 250-252 
wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 
150-151 

Paneth, Josef, 487n 
Paralysis, 55 
Paranoia, 114, 264, 320 
Paraoh’s dream, 349 
Parents 

adults’ death-wishes against, 
277-281 

castration dreams in children, 379 



668 


General Index 


Parents (cont.) 

children’s death-wishes against, 
273-276, 284-288, 344 
dreams of a father’s death, 

434-437, 444-447, 455 
jealousy over children, 376 
Oedipus dreams, 378, 408-410 
Shakespeare’s portrayal of 

parental relationships, 282-283 
symbolism of buildings, stairs, 
and shafts, 377-378 
symbolism of fruit, 384 
wet-nurse memories, 226, 
305-306, 306n 
Paris, France, 217 
Partial awakening, dreaming as, 
102-108 

Parties, 151-152, 306 
Parvenus, 481-482 
Pathological symptoms, dream 
interpretation and, 125-126 
Perceptual system, 610-61 1 
Periodicity (biological) theory, 
190-192, 447n 
Pfaff, E. R„ 95 

Phantasies of a Realist (‘Lynkeus’), 
325n 

Pharaoh’s dream, 122 
Piano, 208 
Plagiarism, 227 
Plagiostomes, 226n, 227 
Plato, 95 

Play, dreams as, 577-578n 

Pleasure principle, xviii, 596, 611 

Plotinus, 159n 

Policeman dream, 426-427 

Politics, 229-235 

Popper, Josef. See ‘Lynkeus’ 

Potzl, O., 204n 
Preconscious thought, 51 On, 

541-545, 553-554, 562-563, 
567-571, 575, 577, 590-591, 
605-606, 612 
Pregnancy, 151, 421 


Prehistoric view of dreams, 36. See 
also Ancient civilizations 
Premonitory dreams. See Prophetic 
nature of dreams 
Primary processes, xv— xvi, 

585-604, 597n 
Prince, Morton, 524-525 
Proper names, 422 
Prophetic nature of dreams, 38, 

39n, 66, 93, 122,214-215, 
617-619 
Propyls, 311-312 
Prostitutes, 222-224, 320 
Psychical apparatus, 539-545, 

552-556, 564-571, 594-595. 
See also Unconscious 
Psychical sources of stimulation, 
xviii, 35, 70-73, 102-108, 
203-204, 241, 245, 494, 
606-607 

Psychological characteristics of 
dreams, 77-93 

Psychoses, relations between dreams 
and, 113-114, 567—568 
Punishment dreams, 481-482, 

484- 485, 557-560 

Puns and turns of speech, 415-423, 
430-434, 437, 441-442, 

485- 486, 521-522n, 523-524 
Purkinje, J. E., 109 

Rabelais, Franfois, 475-476 
Radestock, P., 74, 85-86, 94, 
116-117 

Rank, Otto, xiii, xxviii, xxxi, 
183n-184n, 240n, 257n, 
283n, 287, 312, 350, 380, 
399, 408n, 412, 483 
Rat Man, 321n, 355n, 452n 
Rational thought, 84n, 610 
Reality 

testing dreams, 8 In 
See also Consciousness; 
Unconscious 



General Index 


669 


Rebus metaphor, 296, 418 
Recent material in dreams, 50-51, 
107, 188-192, 203-204, 
204n, 205 
dental dreams, 400 
importance in dream formation, 
562-564 

individual factors affecting 
dreams, 257 

‘innocent’ dreams, 206-207 
internal processes as dream- 
instigators, 202-203 
latent content of dreams, 
239-240 

plays on words, 420 
relation to dream-thoughts, 
555-556,590 
staircase dream, 381 
unconscious linking with, 

572-585 

unconscious mind’s role in 
dream formation, 560-562 
unification of material, 248 
unification with childhood 
experience, 222-223 
wish-fulfilment, 551-552, 
560-563 

Recollection, 73-77 
Reconciliation dreams, 482-483 
Recording dreams, 76-77n 
Recurring dreams, 74n, 212 
Redreaming, 513-515 
Regression, 544-550, 566, 572-585 
Reign of Terror, 58-59 
Religious faith, 39, 60, 97 
Representability, consideration of, 
353-363, 374n, 511 
Representation, means of, 

326-353 

calculations and speeches, 

414-43 4 

causal relations between 
dream-thoughts, 331-332 
clarity and confusion, 346-350 


contradictions and contraries, 
332-334, 341-344 
factors in transforming latent 
thought into manifest content, 

326- 327 

logical relations between dream- 
thoughts, 328-331 
representability considerations, 
353-363, 374n 
sensory intensity, 344-346 
similarity, consoance, and 
approximation, 335-341 
symbols in typical dreams, 
363-373 

value of emergent material, 

327- 328 

See also Symbolism 
Repression, 255, 264, 525, 

562-563, 585-604,611,613 
Reproducing dreams, 76-77, 

83, 297 

Rescue dreams, 413 
Resistance, 518-520, 523-524 
Resolution of issues, dreaming as, 
105-108 

Retinal excitation, 63-64 
Revenants, 490 

Reversal, 341-344, 410-412, 418, 
477-479 

Revision, 518-520 
Riddles, 441-442 
Riding whip, 388-392 
Robbers and burglars in dreams, 414 
Robert, W„ 50-51, 105-106, 
200-201 

Romantic love, 176-177, 356-358, 
375-376, 618-619 
Rome, Italy, 215—218, 215n 
Rosegger, Peter, 479, 479n 

Sachs, Hanns, 420 
Sappho (Daudet), 303, 305-306 
Sappho dream, 302-307, 322 
Satisfaction, 484-485 



670 


General Index 


Scene of action, 78, 257, 538 
Schemer, K. A., 109-113, 157n, 
245,247, 372n, 413 
Schiller, Friedrich, 127-128, 437n 
Schleiermacher, F., 99 
Scholz, F., 94-95 
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 67-68, 

94, 507 

Schrotter, K., 395 
Secondary processes, xv-xvi, 
585-604, 597n 
Secondary revision, 497 
Secrets, 306 

Self-analysis, Freud’s, 461 
Self-corrections, 523 
Self-justification, 196-197 
Self-observation, 126-129 
Sense-impression, 60—61, 72, 

504, 551 

Sensory stimuli. See Sexual stimuli 
and elements; Stimuli and 
source of dream material 
Sequential control of ideas, 83-84 
Sexual stimuli and elements, 
612-613 

anxiety dreams, 256, 581 
Bismarck’s riding whip, 

388-392 

buildings, stairs, and shafts, 
377-378 

castration dreams, 379 
causal relations between 
dream-thoughts, 332 
chemical nature of, 140-141 
childhood experience, 211—212, 
219-220, 222-223, 236-238 
children’s dreams, 155n 
chronological reversal, 343n 
counter-wish dreams, 182 
death, symbolism of, 178 
dental dreams, 399-403 
displacement, 322 
distortion of wish-fulfilment, 
183(-184fn) 


dream-imagination, 111-112 
examination (test-taking) 
dreams, 293 

examples of dream symbols, 
367-372, 367n 
feeling of reality, 384-385 
flowers, 385-388 
flying and falling, 223—224, 
289-290, 289n, 405 
frequency of sexual dreams, 
406-407 

Freud’s bisexuality theory, 347 
Freud’s childhood memories, 227 
fruit symbolism, 384 
genital pain, 251-252 
genitals and intercourse, symbols 
for, 371-372, 375-376 
hat symbolism, 373-375 
hysterical identification, 

174-175, 569 
in Hamlet, 283 
inhibited movement in 
dreams, 352 

‘innocent’ dreams, 205-210, 
220-221, 407-408 
Jung on erotic dreams, 349 
leading to the dream stimulus, 
349-350 

love services, 167-168n 
masturbation, 393-394 
moral sense in dreams, 94 
nakedness in dreams, 264 
neologisms in dreams, 320 
neuroses masquerading as 
illness, 318 

Oedipus dreams, xviii, 280-281, 
378, 383-384, 408-409n, 
408-410 

organic needs struggling with the 
need for sleep, 257n 
organic stimuli, 66 
people and landscapes, 379 
preoccupation with the human 
body, 360-361 



General Index 


671 


puns and turns of speech, 
429-430 

Sappho symbolism, 306 
sexual frustration, 309 
sexual innocence and sin, 

335, 340 

staircases in dreams, 380-385 
Stekei’s interpretation of symbols 
for genitalia, 371-372 
symbolic elements of typical 
dreams, 396-398 
symbolic representations of the 
body, 364-365, 608 
urinary symbols, 380, 413 
Shakespeare, William, 226n, 
282-283, 283n, 432-433, 

452 

She (Haggard), 459-460 
Siblings 

competition in dreams, 305 
dreams of the death of, 268-273 
Freud’s dreams, 317, 440-442 
genital dream-symbols, 376 
Silberer, Herbert, 236 (ref), 
358-359, 527 
Similarity relation, 335-341 
Simon, P. M., 61-62, 69 
Sleep, 40 

arrangement of dream thoughts 
during, 298 

as source of dreams, 55-56 
characterizing the state of, 
587-588 

disturbance causing dreams, 

54-55 

dreaming of, 1 50 
dreams of convenience 
prolonging, 253—254 
functional phenomena, 507-508 
lack of interest in sensory 
stimulus, 244 

organic needs struggling with the 
need for sleep, 257n 
suppression of affect, 474 


Somatic process 

affect, tendency to, 492 
dreams as, 104-108, 237-238 
somatic sources of dreams, 

240- 259 

unification of material, 248-249 
Song of Solomon, 360 
Sophocles, 278-281 
Sound, 58-62 
Spatial consciousness, 80 
Speech. See Language 
Speeches, 427-430 
Sperber, Hans, 365n 
Spina, K„ 77, 84, 86, 88, 99, 242 
Spitteler, C., 270 
Stairs in dreams, 257-259, 

302-305, 322, 342, 377-378, 
380-385 

Starcke, Johan, 90 
Stekel, Wilhelm, 291—293, 364, 
370, 376n, 391,420 
Stimuli and source of dream 
material 

dreaming as somatic process, 
106-108 

external objective sensory stimuli, 
xviii, 55-62, 8 In, 87-90, 

241- 242, 244-245, 249-257, 
290, 586-587 

forgetting dreams, 73-77 
infantile material, 21 1-240 
intensity of, 344-346 
internal organic somatic stimuli, 
65-70, 111-112 
internal subjective sensory 
excitations, 62-65 
memory of waking life, 44-54 
mental disease and dreams, 116 
perception of cessation in 
dreams, 82-84 

psychical apparatus, 539-545, 
595 

psychical sources of stimulation, 
70-73, 494 



672 


General Index 


Stimuli and source of dream 
material (cont.) 

psychological and physiological 
sources, 54-73 
sleep as closing of senses, 90n 
somatic sources, 240-259 
unconscious and conscious, 
610-612 

See also Recent material in 
dreams 

Strieker, S., 101 
Striimpell, A. von, 55 
Striimpell, I., 41, 48-49, 51-52, 

65, 69, 73-76, 83, 86-87, 
242-244 

Subconscious, 610 
Sully, James, 89, 160n 
Super-conscious, 610 
Superficial associations, 533-535 
Superimposed layers of meaning, 
234-235, 240, 240n, 

263, 340 

Supernatural nature of dreams, 
36-39 

Swimming, 405 
Swoboda, Hermann, 119 
Symbolism, xii— xiii, xxvii— xxviii, 

122, 124-125 

Bismarck’s riding whip, 389-392 
bodily organs and functions, 
245-247 

buildings, stairs, and shafts, 
377-378 

chemist’s masturbation dream, 
393-394 

clothing and colors, 420-421 
complementary dreams, 41 
death, 178 

dream interpretation without use 
of, 372-373 

dream theories of somatic 
stimuli, 1 1 1-113 
dreams of normal persons, 
385-388 


examples of dream symbols, 
367-372 

feeling of reality and 

representaiton of repetition, 

383-385 

Freud’s dream of Irma, 131-145 
hat as symbol of a man, 373-375 
of somatic stimuli, 245-247 
preoccupation with the human 
body, 360-361 
puns and turns of speech, 

415-423 

representation of sexual material, 

364—366 

Sappho dream, 303 
sexual elements in ‘innocent’ 
dreams, 209-210 
sexual symbols, experimentation 
with, 394-395 

staircases in dreams, 380-385 
Stekel’s translation of, 364, 
370-371 

symbols of genitals and 
intercourse, 375-376 
unconscious, expression of 
the, 608 

urinary symbols, 380 
woman as a room, 367n 
See also Sexual stimuli and 
elements 

Synthesis of dreams, 326-328 
Syphilis, 182, 320 
Systems, 539 

Tactile stimuli, 244—245, 290 
Talking during sleep, 154-155 
Tartini, Giuseppe, 608, 608n 
Taxes, 180-181 
Teeth in dreams, 69, 132, 135, 

245, 247, 396-398n, 
397-403, 398n 
Telephones, 314 
Theater, 302-307, 424-425, 
502-503 



General Index 


673 


Theoretical value of the study of 
dreams, 613-614 
Theories of dreaming, 101—113 
Therapeutic value of dreams, 

65-68, 65n, 109 

Thirst dreams. See Food and drink 
in dreams 

Threshold symbolism, 508 
Time compression and alteration, 
59, 92-93, 231-233, 330- 
331,343,412, 446 
Tissie, P„ 66-67, 72 
Tobowolska, Justine, 502, 506 
Trains, 396, 399-400, 417-418, 
434-435, 440-442, 

462-466 

Trans-substantiation of sensations 
into dream images, 67 
Travel, 152-154, 190n, 192, 
215-218, 215n, 229-232, 
252,315-316, 347-348, 
415-416, 419, 476 
Typical dream forms, 69, 259-293 
bedwetting, 405-406 
calculation, 425-427 
death of a person of whom the 
dreamer is fond, 266-288 
dental dreams, 399-403 
embarassment at being naked, 
260-266 

examination (test-taking) dreams, 
291-293 

flying and falling, 288-290, 403 
organic stimuli, 412-413 
rescue and birth dreams, 

413-414 

symbolic representation in, 
363-373, 395 

Unconscious, 605-615 

arrangement of dream thoughts 
during sleep, 298 
dream formation process, 

566-571 


Freud’s dream of changing train 
carriages, 465 
hysterical identification, 

174-175 

interpretative process, 531-532 
plays on words, 419 
psychical apparatus, 541-545 
punishment dreams, 557-560 
recent events linking with, 

572-585 

reinforcement preconscious 
wishes, 553-554 
role in dream formation, 
560-562, 564 
two types of, 609 

Unpleasant dreams, 161-170, 182, 
255-256, 557-560 
Unpleasure in dreams, 160 
Unpleasure principle, xviii, 

596-597, 611 

Urination, 222-223, 237-238, 321, 
380,412-413, 475-477 

Value, psychical, 345 
Vaschide, N., 90 
Vegetables, 206-207 
Verbal bridges, 227, 355n, 

386, 402 

Virginity, 386-388 
Visual images and hallucinations, 
63-65, 79, 79n, 358-359 
Void, J. Mourly, 70, 243n, 405 
Volition, 352 

Volkelt, J„ 49, 58, 68, 84, 94, 
245-246 

Waking life. See Consciousness 
War, 470-471 
Weed, Sarah, 160 
Wet-nurse, 226, 305-306, 306n 
Weygandt, W., 41-42, 72, l49n 
Will, conflict of, 352 
Winckler, Hugo, 124n 
Winterstein, A. von, 42 



674 


General Index 


Wish-fulfilment, dreams as, xiv— xv 
absurd dreams of death, 438-439 
Augean Stables dream, 477 
Bismarck’s dream, 390-391 
censorship disguising, 167-168 
childhood experience, 240 
children’s dreams, 151-156n 
chronological relations of 
dream-processes, 574-575 
commonality and identification 
in representation, 338 
counter-wish dreams, 181 
day-dreams as, 497 
death of a person of whom the 
dreamer is fond, 266-267, 
276-278, 287-288 
distortion disguising, 161-173, 
175-176, 179-180 
dreams of convenience, 147-150 
embarassment at being naked, 
261-262 

external stimuli influencing 
dreams, 250-251 
flying dreams, 404 
frequency and diversity of, 
151-152 

Freud’s dream of Irma, 142-143 
Freud’s dream of wife and 
children, 318-319 
Freud’s evisceration dream, 482 
hunger dreams, 155n 
hypocritical dreams disguising 
wish-fulfilment, 161—170, 
479-481 

intensity of dream-images, 
345-346 

organic stimuli, 412—413 
pain and illness, 150-151 


psychology of dream processes, 
551-554 

punishment dream, 48 1-482 
representation through 
identification, 339 
reversals, 343, 556-557 
satisfaction, experience of, 
565-566 

unification of material, 248-249 
unpleasant dreams and anxiety 
dreams, 161 

wishing to prolong sleep, 

254-255 

Women 

childhood experience in dreams, 
220-226 

counter-wish dreams, 181-182 
death of a person of whom the 
dreamer is fond, 271 
disguised wish-fulfilment, 
176-178 

fantasies of sexual misconduct by 
doctors, 207-208 
Freud’s dream of Irma, 131-145 
hysterical identification, 171-175 
infanticide in dreams, 179-180 
‘innocent’ dreams, 206-207, 
220-221 

May-beetle dream, 307-309 
nakedness in dreams, 263n 
wish-fulfilment in dreams, 
175-176 

Wundt, W., 60, 62, 72, 86, 243-244 

Xerxes, 42 

Zeller, A., 98 

Zola, Emile, 317-318 



